SOURCE: Semester 8\ENT\Theoritical\PPT\L15) Facial nerve disorders.pdf

      Ilo’s


1-      Enumerate the parts of the facial nerve
2-      Enumerate branches of the facial nerve and their functions
3-      List the types of facial nerve paralysis
4-      Differentiate between upper motor neuron and lower motor
neuron facial paralysis
5-      Recall the pathological grades of facial nerve injury
6-      Enumerate the causes of facial nerve paralysis
7-      Relate the associated manifestations to the site of the injury
8-      Outline the treatment of Bell's palsy
9-      Differentiate Bell’s palsy from Ramsay-Hunt syndrome
7000 axons:    3000 axons:
              Secretomotor
  Motor
                          Facial nerve proper
                                (motor)




                         Components of
                           facial nerve

Special sensory fibres                          Parasympathetic fibers:
  (taste fibers) from                            arises from superior
    solitary nucleus                                salivary nucleus
Three nuclei supply the FN:
  A- The motor nucleus: in the pons. Sup. Part:
  bilateral innervations from the motor cortex, inferior
  part: unilateral crossed cortical innervations.
  B- The superior salivatory nucleus: parasympathetic
  secretory fibers to lacrimal glands, nasal glands,
  submandibular, sublingual and palatal salivary
  glands.
  C- The nucleus of the tractus solitarius: receives
  taste sensation.
Components of facial nerve



   1. Facial nerve proper
      (motor) : arises from
      facial motor nucleus in
      pons
Course (Segments and branches) of
facial nerve

1. Intracranial
2. Intratemporal
3. Extratemporal
• It arises from the inferior border of the pons
  (pontomedullary sulcus) crosses the CPA to
  enter the IAC.
• Anatomical segments:
     1- Intracranial segment
     2- IAC segment
     3- Labyrinthine segment which ends by the
        geniculate ganglion
     4- Tympanic (horizontal) segment
     5- Mastoid (vertical) segment which ends by
        the stylomastoid foramen.
Branches:
A- Intra-temporal branches:
         1-     Greater     superficial
            petrosal (parasympathetic secretory)
         2- Nerve to stapedius muscle
         3- Chorda tympani (Taste)
B- Extra-temporal branches:
1- Post auricular nerve
2- Nerve to stylohyoid & posterior belly of digastric
3- Cranio-temporal division
4- Cranio-cervical division
Intratemporal part
 Mastoid segment (vertical segment, 15-20mm)




               6
              7




                                                         Greater petrosal nerv
                                                            Geniculate ganglio
                                                    stapedius
                                                     Chorda
                                                     tympani
            Mastoid process
                                     stylomastoid
1. Neuropraxia: Physiologic block, No anatomical
   disruption, temporary, lasts few days and full return
   of function is expected. The axoplasm can still be
   transported from and to the cell body across the
   blocked area and so; the nerve fiber distal to the site
   of injury retains normal electrical response.
2. Axonotmesis: Axon sheath is intact but the axon is
   divided. i.e. more severe lesion. Distal degeneration
   (Wallerian) occurs. Epineurium is intact.
3. Neurotmesis: Epineurium enclosing all nerve
   fascicles is also torn. Regeneration is the worst and
   traumatic neuroma may develop.
   Seddon       Sunderland Pathophysiologic Process
Classification Classification

Neuropraxia         I       Physiologic block


Axonotmesis        II       Axons disrupted
                   III      Axons and endoneurium
                            disrupted
                   IV       Axons, endoneurium, &
                            perineurium disrupted
Neurotmesis        V        Complete transection
2. Second degree/ Axonotmesis.
   -The axons continuity are disrupted.

3. Third degree.
   -The endoneurium are disrupted.

4. Forth degree.
   -The perineum surrounding the nerve fascicles are
   disrupted.
- What is the lesion?
- Where is the lesion?
- Degree of the lesion:
- Causes of the lesion:
What is the lesion?
   Is the face paralyzed or not?
    Inspection of the face movement.
    Testing for facial movement and
    emotional movement. (Laughing;
    blinking, wrinkling, closing eyes,
    whistling, grinning and blowing of
    the cheeks).
- Where is the lesion?
Lesions can be either :
    1. Supra-nuclear (UMNL),
    2. Nuclear,
    3. Infra-nuclear (LMNL).
                    Supra-Nuclear   Infra-Nuclear
   Difference
                       UMNL            LMNL
Type of paralysis      Spastic         Flaccid
  Distribution       Lower face      Whole face

  Other signs        Crossed            _ve
                     hemiplegia         _
Where is the lesion?

i- Nuclear lesions are associated by crossed
hemiplegia, crossed hemianesthesia, other
cranial nerves palsies specially VI.
Lacrimation, salivation and taste are
normal.

ii- LMNL : FN may be affected at different
sites of its course.
1. Schirmer’s tear test
2. Stapedius reflex
3. Evaluation of Taste
4. Submandibular salivary flow
Degree of the lesion
1. Maximum nerve excitability
   test (Hilgers test)
2. Electroneuronograpy
(ENoG)
3. Electromyography (EMG)
   1- Maximum nerve excitability test (Hilger’s
test): The response on the involved side is
compared to the normal side. The idea is that the
distal segment of a completely cut nerve may
continue to conduct when stimulated by a faradic
current (distal to the cut) for as long as 24-72
hours. The response then disappear due to
Wallerian degeneration. Ideally testing is started
on the third post onset day.
  2- Electroneuronography (ENOG) =
Evoked electromyography: Similar to
maximum stimulation test in which the evoked
CAP are recorded. The height of the action
potential is compared with the good side and a
percentage comparison is made. It is a
quantitative test. Degeneration of more than
90% means recovery is poor.
   3- Electromyography (EMG): The paralyzed
side is explored by the EMG needle while the
patient is attempting to move it.
   In the first 10 days, the presence of voluntary
CAP indicates less than total transaction. After
10-14 days, the presence of fibrillation indicates
denervation. After 10 weeks have passed, the
test is prognostic. These action potentials can be
found a week or two before the clinical
evidence of recovery.
Supra-nuclear or nuclear: Hemorrhage; vascular; encephalitis;
tumors, cerebral palsy; ……. Infra-nuclear:
1.Congenital: poor facial muscular development
2. Inflammatory: Malignant ext. otitis; AOM, Ch.OM,
   cholesteatoma, Herpes zoster oticus (Ramasy Hunt
   syndrome), spirochetes (Lyme disease)
3. Traumatic: Fracture base, forceps delivery,
4. Toxic: Diphteria, tetanus,..
5. Metabolic: Diabetes
6. Neoplastic: 1ry tumor: FN neuroma; 2ry tumors of middle
   ear and parotid and CPA.
7. Iatrogenic: mastoid, parotid, CPA surgery
8. Idiopathic: Bell’s palsy
         A- Complications due to FN paralysis:
1-   Drooling
     2- Eye complication: exposure keratitis; corneal ulcer;
     panophthalmitis.
3-   Facial contractures (fixed shortening of the muscles)
4-   Psychological disturbance, depression, and suicidal tendencies.
B- Complications due to abnormal regeneration
1.   Facial tics and spasms: due to short-circuiting between nerve fibers
2.   Abnormal mass movement of the face: Synkinesis.
3.   Crocodile tears: due to misdirected salivation fibers to the lacrimal
     gland.
4.   Frey’s syndrome: facial flushing and sweating over the parotid
     during mastication = misdirected salivary fibers to the sweat
     glands.
1- Treatment of the cause
2- Treatment of the complication: eg. Gold weight for protection
  of the cornea; Facial plastic surgery for the contractures.
3- Treatment of the facial paralysis by facial re-animation
  surgery meant to:
  a- Restoration of anatomical integrity of the FN. Eg. FN
  decompression; anastomosis and grafting. May be indicated in
  Bell’s palsy, Herpes zoster oticus, acute or chronic otitis media,
  trauma, and tumors
  b- Restoration of the functional integrity of the
  neuromuscular system of the face: includes:
  i.   nerve substitution technique e.g. Facial-hypoglossal
  anastomosis; and       ii.   muscle substitution techniques e.g.
  Masseter or temporalis muscle transfer.
4- Facial rehabilitation: e.g. Massage, heat and facial exercises.
Defined as the sudden occurrence of a flaccid

  facial paralysis (LMNL) in an apparently

  healthy individual. It is the commonest cause

  of intratemporal causes of facial paralysis.

- Incidence: 1/5000 per year.

  It is the most common form of FN paralysis.

  It is attributed to sudden exposure to cold.
-    Etiology:       Due      to     VIRAL       causes

    (Activation of Herpes Simplex).
Pathogenesis: Segmental demyelination followed by

    2ry edema and compression.

Clinical picture: Sudden onset of FN paralysis of LMN

    type. Pain in the ear is noted in over half of patients.

    Recovery starts even without treatment in most cases

    within few days up to 3 weeks.
- Prognosis: 71% complete recovery; 25%

  recovers with slight sequalae; and 4% with

  severe sequelae. Not a single patient who

  does not show some recovery.

- Diagnosis: It’s a diagnosis of exclusion.
A- Conservative treatment is helpful in 96% of cases.

    1. Zovirax (800 mg 5 x daily for ONE week) + Cortisone

        therapy

    2. Physiotherapy treatment:      massage,     heat,   and   facial

        exercises.

    3. Dark eye glasses and artificial tears. Protection of the eye.

   B                                                                     -

  Surgical treatment: For complete paralysis with more than 90%

   degeneration by ENOG within 6 days: Decompression of the FN

   (specially the entry of the nerve into the Fallopian canal) through

   Middle Cranial Fossa.
• 5-15% of acute facial palsy
• Palsy appears 2-7 days
• 30-50% show incomplete recovery
• Diffuse lymphocytic infiltration..?
• Vesicles may also affect palate & anterior 2/3
  of tongue
• The FN appears to be more severely
  damaged in herpes zoster oticus
  than with idiopathic facial palsy.
  Only 30% of patients will recover
  normal function, and thus 70%
  experience some sequelae.
Ramsay Hunt Syndrome consists of
• Facial paralysis;
• Auditory and vestibular     dysfunction
  associated with
• Painful herpetic vesicles of the auricle
  and the EAC.
1)     Acyclovir    (Zovirax)      should   be

     started as early as possible (800 mg

     5 times daily for a week) +

2) Oral steroids 1m/kg/day for 2 weeks

3) Decompression if degeneration is

     more than 90% in 2 weeks.
1. Accidental: eg. Fracture of the
   petrous temporal bone:
2. Iatrogenic (Unintentional surgical
   injury)
3. Surgical   (unavoidable     injury
   during surgery)
Accidental: eg. Fracture of the petrous
  temporal bone:
     a-   10% of cases of longitudinal fractures
     b-   40% of cases of transverse fractures.
  The site of the lesion is commonly at the
  geniculate ganglion.
     c- Extratemporal trauma is not common.
  Occasionally, direct trauma may damage the
  nerve.
Iatrogenic (Unintentional surgical injury)
           a-   Incision of a postauricular abscess in
      infant. Incision must be placed high.
      b-    Classical cortical & radical mastoidectomies
      c-    Congenital ear surgery
      d-    Surgery of CPA.
Intraoperative Facial Nerve Monitoring (IOM) is of great
    help to prevent surgical trauma during difficult
    otological/neurotological surgery.
Surgical (unavoidable injury during surgery)
  Impossible to preserve the FN during
  surgery as in some cases of malignancies,
  Tumors of the CPA, extensive
  cholesteatomas, …
    Management: Diagnosis:. electric testing;
     Medical steroids; Surgical Exploration..
MYRINGOTOMY
• Definition:
  Deliberate surgical incision of TM.
