SOURCE: Semester 8\ENT\Theoritical\PPT\L27.2) Chronic Sinusitis.pdf

Chronic Sinusitis
               Prof. Dr. Yasser Nour
Professor of Otorhinolaryngology and H&N Surgery,
               Alexandria University
Fellow of the Royal College of Surgeons of Edinburgh
  Definition

o Chronic Rhinosinusitis (CRS) is one of the
  most prevalent chronic diseases globally.


o It is defined as chronic inflammatory disease
  of sinus mucosa lasting more than 12
  weeks.


o One sinus or several sinuses can be
  involved by the disease.
  Etiology
o Etiology and pathogenesis remain unclear, with
  conflicting theories involving host response vs.
  external factors.

o Proposed triggers include:
   Allergens (e.g. aspirin)
   Bacteria (especially Staph. aureus endotoxins)
   Viruses
   Infection of an adjacent organ (e.g. teeth)
   Trauma
   Anatomical variations

o Biofilms and smoking are linked to worse
  outcomes and resistance to treatment; smoking
  also increases CRS risk.
 Classification
o CRS is divided into two phenotypes:
  CRSwNP (with nasal polyps)
  CRSsNP (without nasal polyps)

o CRSsNP     shows     better    treatment
  outcomes and lower recurrence.

o Symptom differences:
  CRSsNP: More facial pain, headache
  CRSwNP: More loss of smell
  Nasal obstruction is common in both
    types
Classification
Classification
  Other Types
o Aspirin-exacerbated            respiratory
  disease (AERD, Samter’s triad):
  Often very extensive, with significantly
    worse radiological CT findings than
    non-AERD patients with nasal polyps.
  They can be difficult to treat and have
    a higher rate of recurrence.

o Consider secondary causes of CRS in
  patients unresponsive to treatment or
  with systemic symptoms (due to e.g.
  vasculitis or immunodeficiencies)
 Symptoms
o Twelve weeks or longer of two or more of the following signs and symptoms:
  Mucopurulent drainage (anterior, posterior, or both).
  Nasal obstruction (congestion).
  Facial pain/pressure/fullness
  Decreased sense of smell


  AND inflammation is documented by one or more of the following findings:
  Purulent (not clear) mucus or edema in the middle meatus or anterior ethmoid
   region.
  Polyps in the nasal cavity or the middle meatus, and/or
  Radiographic imaging showing inflammation of the paranasal sinuses.
Endoscopy CRSwNP
Endoscopy CRSwNP
Endoscopy CRSsNP
Diagnosis
Diagnosis
Diagnosis
  Diagnosis
o MRI for diagnosis is discouraged because of increased cost and (overdiagnosis) in
  comparison to CT without contrast.

o An important role of CT imaging in CRS with or without polyps is to exclude
  aggressive infections or neoplastic disease that might mimic CRS or ARS.

o Other investigations include
  Allergy testing (e.g. Skin prick testing or RAST).
  Nasal biopsy (to exclude neoplasia and to look for granulomas/vasculitis)
  CBC
  Serum eosinophilia
  ANCA (Wegner’s granulomatosis)
  ACE (Sarcoidosis)
  Medical Treatment
o The mainstay of treatment is:
   Saline nasal irrigation: improves mucociliary clearance +
    removes antigens and biofilm)
   Topical intranasal corticosteroids (INCS): effective anti-
    inflammatory agents.

o In case of no response from intranasal corticosteroids, a short
  course of oral corticosteroids can be used (only in CRSwNP).

o Chronic antibiotics (especially of the macrolide class) can also
  be used in treatment of CRSsNP.

o Other treatments options:
   Mucolytics.
   Decongestants.
   Biological therapy in CRSwNP.
  Surgical Treatment
o Functional    endoscopic    sinus    surgery
  (FESS).

o Surgery is considered after failed medical
  therapy:
   Requires at least 12 weeks of nasal saline,
    INCS, and often systemic steroids
   Indicated for patients needing >2–3 courses
    of oral steroids/year
   agents.

o Goals of surgery: Remove obstruction, reduce
  inflammation, and improve delivery of topical
  meds.
