SOURCE: Semester 8\Pedo\Theoritical\PPT\26)allergy_.pdf

ALLERGY IN CHILDREN

      Dr Ashraf Galal
   Professor of Pediatrics
 Up to 40% of children in the UK have one or more allergic
  disorders (eczema, allergic rhinitis, or asthma) and 3%–6%
  have food allergy.
 Allergic diseases occur when individuals make an abnormal
  immune response to harmless environmental stimuli, usually
  proteins.
             Definitions

 Hypersensitivity – objectively reproducible symptoms or signs
  following exposure to a defined stimulus (e.g. food, drug,
  pollen) at a dose that is usually tolerated by most people.
 Allergy –is the result of immune reaction to antigens known as
  allergens. This can be IgE mediated (e.g. peanut allergy) or
  non-IgE mediated (e.g. celiac disease)
 Atopy –genetically mediated predisposition to produce specific
  IgE after exposure to allergens. Strongly associated with asthma,
  allergic rhinitis and conjunctivitis, eczema and food allergy.
 Sensitization – a positive test to an allergen, either by skin prick
  test, or specific IgE. Does not equate to allergy unless a clinical
  reaction is initiated on exposure. However, the higher the number
  of positive tests, the more likely the person is going to be “allergic”
 Anaphylaxis – a serious allergic reaction with bronchial, laryngeal,
  or cardiovascular involvement that is rapid in onset and may
  cause death.
PATHOGENESIS
 Many genes have been linked to the development of allergic
  disease. Polymorphisms or mutations in these genes lead to a
  susceptibility to allergy.
 Allergy is an ‘epigenetic condition’ where the environment
  interacts with these genes.
 Intact barrier function of the skin appears to be important.
  Alterations in the filaggrin gene are associated with increased
  risk of eczema and food allergy.
     Normal skin
 In healthy people the skin acts
  as a protective barrier against
  external irritants, moisture
  loss, and infection.
 Filaggrin , a structural protein
  in the epidermis, and its
  breakdown products are
  critical to skin barrier function,
  including moisturization of the
  skin.
 These mediators and others are responsible for the symptoms that arise in
  an allergic reaction:
 Vasodilation leading to erythema.
 Increased permeability of the vasculature yielding swelling.
 Smooth muscle constriction that results in bronchoconstriction and
  abdominal pain.
 Nerve activation that is responsible for itching, sneezing, coughing.
Types of allergic reactions
                                        Type 1              Type 4
                                      IMMEDIATE            DELAYED
                                    IgE-mediated       T-CELL MEDIATED




                            Urticaria/angioedema   Dermatitis
Chemical mediator
                            histamine              T cell-derived cytokines
Onset                       Minutes                Hours

Total & allergen-specific   Can help               avoid
IgE


Antihistamine               help                   Not effective
Laboratory
             skin prick test
 Food allergy

  Over 80% of children with food allergy present in the first year of life; many have atopic eczema.

 The most common food allergens are milk, egg, soy, wheat, peanut, tree nuts,
  fish, and shellfish.

 Seeds, with sesame being the most common, are also increasingly identified as
  allergens.
 Food allergy is most commonly primary, where children usually react on first
  exposure.
 It can also be secondary to cross-reactivity between proteins present in fresh
  fruits/ vegetables/nuts and those present in pollens, e.g. a child who can eat
  apples may develop allergy to apples when older if they become allergic to birch
  tree pollen, because the apple and birch pollen share a very similar protein. This
  common condition is termed the ‘pollen food allergy syndrome’ or “oral allergy
  syndrome”
       Adverse reactions to foods


food intolerances         food allergies



                   IgE-              non–IgE
                 mediated           mediated
  Clinical features


 It is usually IgE-mediated, with a history of allergic symptoms
  varying from urticaria to facial swelling to anaphylaxis, usually 10–
  15 minutes (up to 2 hours) after ingestion of a food.
 Cutaneous: urticaria, angioedema, pruritus, flushing, morbilliform rash
 Gastrointestinal: Swelling of lips/tongue/uvula, nausea, vomiting,
  abdominal cramps, diarrhea
 Cardiovascular: Tachycardia, hypotension, pallor, shock, loss of
  consciousness
 Respiratory Upper airway: rhinorrhea, nasal pruritus, nasal congestion,
  sneezing, hoarseness, stridor. Lower airway: cough, wheeze, dyspnea,
  cyanosis
 Neurologic: Anxiety, headache, seizure, altered mental status, feeling of
  impending doom
 Ocular: Conjunctival erythema and tearing
 Non- IgE-mediated food allergy typically occurs hours after ingestion and
  usually involves the gastrointestinal tract, with diarrhea, vomiting, abdominal
  pain and sometimes faltering growth.
 It sometimes presents in an infant with blood in the stools in the first few weeks
  of life from proctitis, or rarely with severe repetitive vomiting in an infant
  following milk or rice which can result in shock (food protein induced
  enterocolitis syndrome).
  Diagnosis

 The clinical history is key in food allergy diagnosis. Food allergy
  should be suspected if typical symptoms occur following exposure
  to a particular food.
 For IgE-mediated food allergy, the most helpful confirmatory tests
  are skinprick tests and measurement of specific IgE antibodies in
  blood as described above.
           Diagnosis of
           food allergy


Careful    Evidence of
                          Oral food
clinical    allergen-
                          challenge
history    specific IgE
   Allergen challenge
 If results from the history and investigations are not clear, or if the child is
  thought to have grown out of an allergy,
 This is usually a food challenge for food allergy. The child is given increasing
  quantities of the food, starting with a tiny amount, until a full portion is
  reached.
 Sometimes these are ‘placebo controlled’, where the child and parents do not
  know which of the challenges involves the food or a placebo.
 The test should be performed in a hospital with full resuscitation facilities
  available, with close monitoring for signs of anaphylaxis.
       Natural History

The natural course of the disease differs depending on the allergen.


Most outgrowing milk, egg, wheat, and/or soy allergies
and those with peanut, tree nut, fish, and/or shellfish allergies tending to
have lifelong allergy.
   Management

 The management of a food-allergic child involves avoidance of the relevant
  food(s).
 If a child is diagnosed with one allergy, related allergies need to be considered;
 Proteins with an unstable tertiary structure may be rendered non-allergenic by
  heat degradation or other forms of processing
 In addition to dietary management, the child and family must be able to
  manage an allergic reaction.
 Immunotherapy for food allergy involves giving the child minute amounts of
  the food they are allergic to and building up that amount over time.
  Prevention of allergic diseases
  Oral tolerance induction

 This is the induction of “immune tolerance” by feeding common
  food allergens such as eggs, cow’s milk and peanut to young
  infants to reduce the risk of allergy.
 This is now often suggested in infant feeding guidelines for
  countries where food allergy is common.
 Immunological tolerance to a food depends on early exposure
  through the GIT and the development of allergic sensitization
  occurs by exposure to foods through an impaired skin barrier. A
  hypothesis supported by many clinical studies.
ATOPIC MARCH


      AD

BA          FA


 AR        AC
A 10-month-old infant is brought to the clinic. The
mother reports that the child has a positive skin prick
test to peanuts but has never consumed them and has
no history of clinical symptoms upon exposure to other
foods. Which of the following best describes the child's
current status?

A.Anaphylaxis
B.Clinical Peanut Allergy
C.Sensitization
D.Oral Allergy Syndrome
A 10-month-old infant is brought to the clinic. The
mother reports that the child has a positive skin prick
test to peanuts but has never consumed them and has
no history of clinical symptoms upon exposure to other
foods. Which of the following best describes the child's
current status?

A.Anaphylaxis
B.Clinical Peanut Allergy
C.Sensitization
D.Oral Allergy Syndrome
An infant presents with severe repetitive vomiting and
diarrhea that occurs consistently 4 hours after the
ingestion of cow's milk. Based on the timing and
symptoms, this reaction is most likely:

A. Type 1 IgE-mediated reaction
B. Non-IgE-mediated food allergy
C. Atopic March
D. Immediate Hypersensitivity
An infant presents with severe repetitive vomiting and
diarrhea that occurs consistently 4 hours after the
ingestion of cow's milk. Based on the timing and
symptoms, this reaction is most likely:

A. Type 1 IgE-mediated reaction
B. Non-IgE-mediated food allergy
C. Atopic March
D. Immediate Hypersensitivity
THANK YOU
