SOURCE: Semester 8\Pedo\Theoritical\PPT\39)Hematuria.pdf

HEMATURIA
 Samar Atef Elshafey
    M D , M RC P C H
The Glomerular Filtration Barrier (GFB)
 Hematuria is the presence of an
increased number of RBCs in urine.
        Gross hematuria                             Microscopic hematuria
• The urine is visibly discolored with blood:   •   Blood isn't visible in the urine and is only
  pink, red, dark brown, tea-colored                detected under microscopy or by dipsticks.
• +/- small or large blood clots
  The degree of
hematuria bears no
relationship to the
seriousness of the
 underlying cause
Detection of Hematuria
DIPSTICK (STRIP TEST)




     The reagent strip reaction utilizes the pseudo-
  peroxidase activity of hemoglobin (or myoglobin) to
 catalyze a reaction, producing an oxidized chromogen
                 with a green-blue color.
DIPSTICK (STRIP TEST)




Detects Haem Molecule, Not RBCs
The strip doesn’t differentiate between
  hematuria, hemoglobinuria, and
            myoglobinuria
   URINE
MICROSCOPY
RBCs lyse rapidly in dilute or acidic
urine, so negative microscopy for red
blood cells is only valid if performed
   promptly on a freshly voided
             specimen.
  The definition of
microscopic hematuria
   is controversial
Hematuria

• The persistent presence of >5 RBCs/high-power
  field (hpf) in uncentrifuged urine.

• >10 RBCs/hpf during microscopic analysis of 10-
  15 mL of freshly voided and centrifuged urine,
  or a 1+ positive urinary dipstick reading.
• Healthy children can have occasional red cells in the urine.
•   A single examination will yield hematuria in approximately 4-6% of school children, and
    therefore requires retesting.

•   Only 0.5% children will have persisting hematuria in repeat samples 2-3 weeks apart.
               FEVER, ILLNESS, OR
               EXTREME EXERTION

Transient   • Transient microscopic hematuria and mild
              proteinuria

Hematuria
            • Repeat the urine dipstick and microscopic
              urinalysis twice within 2 weeks after the initial
              result.
            • If the hematuria resolves, no further tests are
              required.
            • If microscopic hematuria persists on at least two
              of the three consecutive samples, then further
              evaluation is required
Etiology of Persistent
     Hematuria
                  Etiology
Glomeruli                                  Glomerular

Upper           Tubulo-interstitial
Urinary
 Tract               Vascular

                Pelvicalyceal system         Extra-
                       Ureter
Lower                 Bladder
                                           glomerular
Urinary               Urethra
 Tract              Extrarenal
            (systemic bleeding disorder)
                                         Hematuria
           Glomerular                                                           Extra-glomerular
Familial hematuria     Glomerulonephritis
                                                                                                                           Lower urinary
disorders              ▪ Acute post-infectious GN                      Upper urinary tract
▪ Thin basement           (e.g., APSGN)                                                                                       tract
    membrane disease   ▪ MPGN
▪ Alport syndrome      ▪ SLE                          Tubulo-                                                          ▪ Urinary tract infection
                                                                              Anatomic                Vascular
                       ▪ IgA nephropathy            interstitial                                                       ▪    Hypercalciuria
                       ▪ IgA vasculitis (HSP)                                                                          ▪    Renal calculi
                       ▪ Sickle cell                ▪   Interstitial      ▪   Polycystic kidney   ▪   Renal vein       ▪    Trauma/instrumentation
                          glomerulopathy                nephritis             disease                 thrombosis       ▪    Structural abnormalities of
                       Hemolytic uremic syndrome                          ▪   Tumor (Wilms)       ▪   Nutcracker            ureter, bladder (e.g. PUJO)
                                                                                                      syndrome         ▪    Tumors e.g., bladder
                                                                                                                            rhabdomyosarcoma
                                                                                                                       ▪    Systemic bleeding disorder
                                                                                                                   ▪       Perineal irritation
                                                                                                                   ▪       Vaginal bleeding/ menarche
                                                                                                                   ▪       Rectal fissures
                                                                                                                   ▪       Factitious
CAUSES OF HEMATURIA IN THE NEWBORN


                 • Renal vein thrombosis
                 • Renal artery thrombosis
                 • Autosomal recessive polycystic kidney
                   disease
                 • Obstructive uropathy
                 • Urinary tract infection
                 • Bleeding and clotting disorders
                 • Trauma, bladder catheterization
Terrifying
        If you see red urine

I. Is this hematuria or just a red color of urine?
II. Is it only hematuria, or is there bleeding elsewhere?
III. If it is only hematuria, where does it originate?
IV. How should I proceed to settle the diagnosis?
        If you see red urine

I. Is this hematuria or just a red color of urine?



     Red urine is not
       necessarily
       hematuria
If urine is red, tea or cola-colored,
      but with <5 RBCs/hpf


           • Hemoglobinuria: intravascular hemolysis (e.g.,
 Haem        HUS, favism)
positive   • Myoglobinuria: rhabdomyolysis (e.g., crush
             injury)


           • Urobilinogen: hemolytic anemia (e.g., favism)
           • Bilirubinuria: direct bilirubin in obstructive
 Haem        jaundice
negative   • Foods: beets, rhubarb, artificial cereals, drinks
             and other foods containing red-colored dyes
           • Medications: methyl-dopa, rifampicin
           • Metabolites: urates, porphyrin
                                                                 22
    I. IS THIS
 HEMATURIA OR
JUST A RED COLOR
   OF URINE?
                   Urine appearance: smoky vs clear
    I. IS THIS
 HEMATURIA OR
JUST A RED COLOR
   OF URINE?



   DIPSTICK FOR
      BLOOD
    I. IS THIS
 HEMATURIA OR
JUST A RED COLOR
   OF URINE?
                   Urine microscopy
                      to confirm
                      hematuria
POSITIVE DIPSTICK
     FOR BLOOD


•   Dipstick positive + RBCs on   •   Dipstick positive + low or absent
          microscopic UA                 RBCs on microscopic UA




    Hematuria                                Hemoglobinuria
                                             Myoglobinuria
        If you see red urine

I. Is this hematuria or just a red color of urine?
II. Is it only hematuria, or is there bleeding elsewhere?


                   Systemic bleeding
                    disorder should
                     be taken into
                     consideration
        If you see red urine

I. Is this hematuria or just a red color of urine?
II. Is it only hematuria, or is there bleeding elsewhere?
III. If it is only hematuria, where does it originate?
      III. IF IT PROVES
        HEMATURIA,
                                          History
                                       Examination
     WHERE DOES THE
       BLOOD COME
           FROM?
                                       Urine analysis
 Hematuria may originate from
different sites in the urinary tract
  III. Where does blood come from?

Glomeruli                                  Glomerular

 Upper          Tubulo-interstitial
 Urinary
  Tract              Vascular

                Pelvicalyceal system         Extra-
 Lower                 Ureter
                      Bladder
                                           glomerular
 Urinary              Urethra
  Tract              Extrarenal
            (systemic bleeding disorder)
     History
  i. Color of urine

• Cola/tea-
  colored/brown/burgundy
  urine (glomerular) vs bright
  red (extraglomerular or
  lower urinary tract causes)
        HISTORY
             Lower urinary tract
 iii.
Blood
clots
                   Blood clots are
             pathognomonic of the lower
                urinary tract origin of
                     hematuria
HISTORY
  Previous history
   of hematuria
HISTORY                                                       Suggest the
                                                              glomerular
                                                               origin of
   Recent history of               Edema                      hematuria
  pharyngitis or URTI      • Morning puffiness and
• 2-3 weeks ago suggests     generalized edema
  post-streptococcal GN                                  Systemic symptoms
• 1-2 days ago suggests              Oliguria            • Fatigue
  IgA nephropathy
                                                         • Rash
                                 Hypertension
                           •   headache, mental status   • Arthralgia
      Recent skin              changes, visual changes
       infection               (diplopia), epistaxis

         Recent                   Volume
     gastrointestinal          overload/heart
        infection                  failure
HISTORY

• Hematuria associated with glomerulonephritis is
  typically painless but can be associated with flank pain
  when acute or unusually severe.
      HISTORY                                           LOWER
                                                       URINARY
                                                      SYMPTOMS

  Symptoms of                                           Vulvovaginitis
     UTI                       Symptoms of
                                Urolithiasis                  Recent
• Dysuria, frequency,     • Unilateral flank pain        surgery/trauma,
  abdominal pain.           radiating to the groin        including non-
                            suggests obstruction by     accidental injury
• Flank pain with fever
  and rigors suggests       a calculus                 Sexual activity &
  acute pyelonephritis                                      STDs
   HISTORY
     History of              Exercise-related
     sickle cell
  disease/trait (as      Medication history                  Menarche
   appropriate,         • Rifampicin                        In pubertal girls
                        • Metronidazole
  black patients)
                        • Nitrofurantoin
                        • NSAIDs
                                                              Food intake
                                                          • Beetroot
History of underlying   • Cyclophosphamide
                                                          • Berries
  bleeding disorder     • Anticoagulants
                                                          • Candies
(personal and family)   • Over-the-counter Medications,
                        • Calcium or Vitamin D
                          Supplementation
                        • Herbal Compounds
HISTORY
      Family history
• Hematuria
• Renal disease
• Stones
• Visual or hearing loss
• Hypertension
• Intracerebral bleed
• Polycystic kidney disease
• Sickle cell disease
• Coagulopathy
          EXAMINATION
      Blood pressure
 (manual)measurements:                     •   Eyes
    should be assessed                     •   Skin
 according to age, gender
     & height centiles                     •   Genitalia
                                           •   Joint tenderness/
                            • Weight and       swelling
                              height
    Edema and ascites                      •   Abdominal
                                               masses
• Volume overload                          •   Malformations
                                               (e.g., VATER)
• Chest
• Heart
• Hepatomegaly
• Child abuse must always be suspected in the
  child presenting with unexplained perineal
  bruising and hematuria.
                  URINE ANALYSIS



• Urine microscopy to confirm hematuria
• Urine cytology to look for casts/dysmorphic red cells
               vi. Urine RBC morphology
       Phase-contrast microscopy on freshly voided urine               Acanthocytes


            Isomorphic                       Dysmorphic (>20%)
• Same shape                              • Different sizes & shapes
• Non-glomerular:                         • Glomerular: renal (GN)
   o Renal: tubulo-interstitial
   o Extrarenal: UT, Bleeding diathesis




    Extra-glomerular                             Glomerular
• Although urinary RBC morphology may be normal
 with lower tract bleeding and dysmorphic from
 glomerular bleeding, it is not sensitive enough to
 unequivocally delineate the site of hematuria.
                                 vii. RBCs casts

Where
 does
blood
come
                                                           Red Blood Cell casts are
from?                                                       pathognomonic of the
                                                        glomerular origin of hematuria

        On fresh urine or acidic urine stored at 4 °C
        ix. Proteinuria

Where
 does
blood
come            Significant Proteinuria (> 100
from?                mg/dl) indicates the
                   glomerular origin of the
                          pathology
Where does blood come from?
RED FLAGS (may need URGENT referral to pediatric
nephrology):

Hematuria AND any of:
• Proteinuria
• Hypertension
• Fluid overload: edema, ascites
• Deranged renal function
• The most common cause of gross hematuria
  in children is bacterial or viral urinary tract
  infection
• In children, most cases of acute glomerulonephritis
  have a post-infectious etiology, most commonly
  following infection with group A β-hemolytic
  streptococcal infection of the throat or skin.
    RECURRENT GROSS
          HEMATURIA


• IgA nephropathy
• Alport syndrome/ Thin glomerular
  basement membrane disease
• Idiopathic hypercalciuria
• Nutcracker syndrome
• Exercise
If recurrent episodes of macroscopic hematuria
with or without red flags without an identifiable
cause, consider renal biopsy
                                      Etiology

•Usually appear after infection
 by “nephritogenic” group A
 beta-hemolytic streptococci
 (GAHS)

•GAHS typically can be found on
 the skin (pyoderma/impetigo, M
 types 47, 49, 55) and                  Streptococcal skin
 throat (pharyngitis, M types 1, 2,                           Streptococcal
                                      infection/pyoderma/
 4, 12)                                                      throat infection
                                           Scarlet fever        (Cold weather)
                                           (Warm weather)
                     EPIDEMIOLOGY
•Immune-mediated inflammation
•It is one of the most common glomerular causes of gross hematuria
 in children.
•Commonest cause of acute nephritic syndrome/ acute
 glomerulonephritis in children.
                      EPIDEMIOLOGY
              Age                                Sex

• Most cases between 2-18 years   • Preponderance of boys (2:1)
  of age                          • Unclear why, since the overall
• Peak prevalence 6-8 years of      prevalence of group A strep
  age                               does not vary between boys
• Uncommon in very young <3 yr      and girls
  perhaps related to less strep
  carriage/colonization or
  potential immune factors)
                         EPIDEMIOLOGY
Scope of disease
 • 500,000 cases annually worldwide
 • 5,000 deaths
Disparities in prevalence
 • >90% of cases from economically disadvantaged areas

Seasonal variation
 • More respiratory-associated cases in colder months and more skin-associated
   cases in warmer months
               EPIDEMIOLOGY
Epidemic disease
• Most commonly: sporadic
• Epidemics and clusters of households (camps,
  military) occur periodically throughout the world
• Epidemics most often in areas with higher
  baseline rates of disease
                Throat/skin infection by
                 GAHS (nephritogenic
Pathogenesis            strains)

                 Antibodies to streptococcus
               (anti-streptolysin O) are formed
                       in the circulation.
      APSGN: Immune Complex Nephritis
    LM: diffuse proliferative (exudative) GN

•   Polymorphonuclear leukocyte infiltration is common in glomeruli during
    the early stage of the disease.
•   Proliferation of endothelial cells (occlusion of capillaries)
•   Proliferation of mesangium (mesangial cells and matrix)
•   Crescent formation in severe cases
    Clinical Course – Spectrum of Disease

ASYMPTOMATIC                   KIDNEY FAILURE
Clinical Presentation: Latent period
•Interval between infection and nephritis
•Latent period is often between 1 and 6 weeks
•But subclinical disease makes the time course difficult to pinpoint
•Anecdotal reports that respiratory-related illness (1-2 wk) typically
 has an onset sooner than skin-related (3-6 wk)
Clinical Presentation: Latent period
  Streptococcus pharyngitis   Streptococcus pyoderma



         1-2 weeks                 3-6 weeks




            Acute nephritic syndrome
Clinical Characteristics at Presentation
            •   Hematuria
                •   Asymptomatic microscopic hematuria
                •   Gross painless, brown, smoky, tea-like or cola-like
            •   Hypertension
                •   Reported in 60-75%
                •   Mild- moderate, subsides after diuresis
                •   Encephalopathy (5-10%)
            •   Azotemia/Increased Creatinine
                •   Reported in 30-40%
            •   Oliguria
                •   Reported in 25-35%
            •   Edema
                •   Typically mild and found on the face, periorbital, and extremities
                •   Ascites and anasarca may occur in children if kidney failure or heart
                    failure occurs.
            •   Proteinuria
                •   Usually, normalizes after 4 weeks
                •   Nephrotic syndrome develops in a minority (<5%) of childhood cases.
        Clinical Course: Serious Sequelae
                              Symptomatic
   Encephalopathy/                                     Electrolyte
                               Pulmonary                                      Dialysis
       Seizures                                        disturbance
                               Edema/CHF
• Around 5-10% of most   • 5-15% of most large    • Hyperkalemia     • 1-2% of most large
  large cohorts            cohorts                                     cohorts
• Generally related to   • Chest radiograph                          • Most often related to
  hypertension             changes in up to 50%                        RPGN
     Clinical Picture: Heart Failure

Secondary to   Respiratory distress
   HTN or
hypervolemia
                   Orthopnea
                    Cough
                                      +       Tachycardia
                                              Tachypnea
                                          Tender hepatomegaly
                                                    Gallop
                                            Decreased breath sounds
                                                     Rales
                                                  Hypoxemia
    Clinical Picture: Hypertensive emergency

                                                 •Blurred vision
                                                 •Severe headache
                                                 •Altered mental status
                                                  &coma
                                                 •Convulsions



    The effects of acute hypertension not only depend on the severity of
hypertension but also on the absolute change in comparison with the patient’s
          baseline blood pressure and the rate at which it has risen.
Clinical Picture: Dialysis

                                      Hyperkalemia,
                                   hyperphosphatemia,
                                  hypocalcemia, acidosis,
                                   seizures, and uremia




       Rapidly progressive GN: Crescentic GN
Diagnosis
•Physical Exam
 • Focus on findings related to volume overload: BP, edema, auscultation
•Imaging
 • Potential need for chest radiograph
 • Consideration of kidney ultrasound
 • MRI brain for PRES: parieto-occipital areas on T2-weighted images.
        Diagnosis: Laboratory Investigations
 Evidence of GN and its              Evidence of preceding
     complications                   streptococcal infection             Etiology of GN
• Urinalysis:                      • Skin and throat swab             • Serological test:
     • Rusty (smoky) / tea-color   • High anti-streptolysin O titer        • Activation of alternate
     • Dysmorphic RBCs,              (ASOT)                                  complement pathway
     • RBC casts                   • Anti-deoxyribonuclease B
                                     (DNAse B) titer (skin)                • C3 decrease (90%):
     • Sterile Pyuria                                                        return to normal
     • Proteinuria (mild to
        moderate; UPC normal to
                                                                             within 6-8 weeks.
        nephrotic)                                                         • Serum C4 is typically
• KFT (Urea & creatinine): may                                               normal
  be impaired                                                         • Full blood count: Mild
     • Significant ↓ GFR is                                             normochromic anemia may be
       unlikely in children                                             present from hemodilution and
• Hyperkalemia, hypocalcemia,                                           low-grade hemolysis.
  metabolic acidosis, and
  hyponatremia are seen only in
  severe patients
Diagnosis: Laboratory investigations


        C3 depression is the
       most common positive
             lab finding
Kidney Biopsy
 1. Severe renal impairment (RPGN)
 2. Nephrotic syndrome
 3. Normal C3
 4. ?? Absence of evidence of streptococcal infection
 5. Persistent gross hematuria or significant proteinuria for >2
    months
 6. Persistent impaired kidney function >2 months
 7. Persistent microscopic hematuria or any proteinuria >6-12
    months
 8. Persistent hypocomplementemia >3 months
       APSGN: Immune Complex Nephritis




A. Light microscopy: proliferative and often exudative GN; findings vary within the clinical spectrum; crescents are less common
            B. Immunofluorescence: diffuse C3 and IgG is typical; C3 deposition is often described as “starry sky”
               C. Electron microscopy: subepithelial electron-dense humps as well as subendothelial deposits
                                        Treatment
       Place of treatment:               Supportive management               Specific management

• Hospital management:                • Diet                            • Edema:
  Complicated cases (renal failure,     ❖ Salt restriction                ❖ Salt restriction, fluid balance,
  HF, encephalopathy)                   ❖ Fluid restriction:                diuretics (Furosemide 1-2
                                             Intake = insensible            mg/Kg/day)
                                             (400ml/m2/day) + urine
                                             output                     • Hypertension
                                      • Rest:                             ❖ Salt restriction, fluid balance,
                                        ❖ During the oliguric phase         diuretics (Furosemide 1-2
                                                                            mg/Kg/day)
                                      • Avoid new kidney insults:         ❖ Ca channel blockers
                                                                            (Nifedipine)
                                        ❖ Avoid effective volume
                                           depletion and nephrotoxins
            Treatment of Complications
                                                             Hypertensive
      Renal failure                Heart failure
                                                            encephalopathy
• Fluid balance, diuretics   • Preload reduction:       • Antihypertensive (lV
• Dialysis (in severe           • Diuretics               Hydralazine or
  cases)                     • Afterload reduction:       nitroglycerin)
                                • CCB, ACE
                                  inhibitors
                             • Inotropes:
                                • Dopamine (digitalis
                                  should be avoided)
    Management: RPGN
Uncommon finding, but needs to be
considered in the setting of decreasing
kidney function


Pulse intravenous methylprednisolone

• Most common therapy
PREVENTION
•Early systemic antibiotic therapy for streptococcal throat and skin infections
 does not eliminate the risk of GN.
•Family members of patients with acute GN, especially young children, should be
 considered at risk and be cultured for group A β-hemolytic streptococci and
 treated if positive.
•Family pets, particularly dogs, have also been reported as carriers.
                Unsupported Historical Management
           Intervention                  Recommendation                           Rationale
                                                           •   Indicated only if an active bacterial infection is present
Routine antibiotic provision to patient Rare                   at diagnosis (e.g., persistent pharyngitis or impetigo).
                                                           •   Antibiotics do not alter the course of the GN

                                                           •   Only indicated during epidemics or in special clinical
                                                               circumstances, such as if a family member is a known
Routine antibiotic provision to family   Not Recommended       carrier or if there is a high risk of transmission to a
                                                               vulnerable individual.
                                                           •   Modern practice favors "rest as needed." Strict
                                                               bedrest does not improve renal outcomes or speed
Routine protracted bed-rest              Not Recommended       recovery.
                                                           •   Children should be allowed to set their own pace.
                                                           •   Outside of the acute phase (where hypertension or
Routine limitation to sports             Not Recommended       gross hematuria might limit activity), there is no
                                                               evidence that exercise worsens the disease.
General Clinical Expectations
         General Clinical Expectations
                       Short-term
                                                                                        Long-term
                        outcome:
                                                                                        outcome:
                        Excellent
                                                                   Almost all
 Recurrent gross                           Hypocomplemen
                    •Most clinical signs                       affected children   •As with any AKI
   hematuria is                               temia for>3                           episode, even if
                     and symptoms                                 will have no
  common with                               months should                           there is a full initial
                     resolve                                        clinical or                               Recurrent APSGN
new acute illness    spontaneously and     raise concern for                        recovery, a
                                                                   laboratory                                   is quite rare
    early after      within weeks:             a chronic                            predisposition to
                                                                  residuals of
    diagnosis        Complete recovery     hypocomplemen                            CKD exists
                                                                nephritis by 1-2
(recrudescence)      >95% (6-8 weeks)          temic GN                            •2% of children
                                                                       years        develop CKD
                    •Mortality <0.5-1%
                                                                                   •ESKD from APSGN
                                                                                    is uncommon
   IgA nephropathy is defined by the detection of IgA in glomeruli as
   dominant or co-dominant in respect to the other immunoglobulins



                                                   IgAN secondary to
Primary IgAN (IgAN)
                                                    vasculitis (IgAVN)
   Berger’s GN
                                                 Henoch-Schoenlein GN
IgA vasculitis
IgA Vasculitis/ HSP
 IgA Vasculitis (Henoch-Schoenlein purpura) is a vasculitis with IgA-dominant
   immune deposits affecting small vessels (capillaries, venules, arterioles),
 involving skin, gut, and glomeruli, and associated with arthralgia or arthritis
IgA Vasculitis/ HSP
•    More common in children (2-11 yr, peak 6 yr)
    ✓ Most common vasculitides in childhood
    ✓ Adult symptoms are typically worse
    ✓ Incidence in children 60-140 cases/mp children, IgAVN develops in 20-80%, in median 30% (15-70 cases per year)
    ✓ Incidence in adults 4-13 cases per year (peak 45 y), IgAVN develops in 80%

•    Small-vessel vasculitis
•    Deposition of IgA in the skin, kidney, and abdominal vessels
•    White/Asian males > everyone else
•    Typically preceded by an URI
IgA Vasculitis/ HSP
In children, IgAVN renal involvement is highly variable
                                    20-28%:
                    70-80%:        Abnormal
                  Recovery in 4     urinary
                     weeks        sediment for
                                   >1 month


                     1-7%:          Frequent
                  progression         rapid
                   to ESKD in     regression of
                   long-term        IgAVN in
                   follow-up        children
Monitoring IgA Vasculitis Patients
            IgAV nephritis


Analgesia
IgA Vasculitis/ HSP: Natural history
• Most common in children
• In children, the most frequent remission
  ✓ 95% full recovery after 3-4 weeks
• In rare cases, rapid progression
• Possible progression over decades
• ESKD is rare but possible:
   ✓1-7% in children
IgA nephropathy (IgAN) is the
    most common chronic
                                 In the absence of
glomerular disease in children    systemic disease
 IgA Nephropathy (IgAN)
• IgAN can present throughout the life course but is most common in the second and
  third decades of life.
  ✓ If present in children, the median age of presentation is 10.9 years
  ✓ Uncommon in children <3 years old
• Male> female
• East Asians > Whites > Blacks
• Kidney function decline tends to be slow (years)
      IgAN: Clinical Presentation
Children typically present with intra-infectious gross hematuria, leading to early diagnosis
by kidney biopsy
 • Synpharingitic Hematuria: Gross hematuria often occurs within 1-2 days of onset of an upper respiratory or
   gastrointestinal infection, and may be associated with loin pain.

Asymptomatic microscopic hematuria (with varying degrees of proteinuria, with or
without progressive kidney disease)

Mild to moderate hypertension is most often seen in patients with nephritic or nephrotic
syndrome

More benign in children than adults (IgAN is an uncommon cause of ESKD during
childhood).
https://creativemeddoses.com/
 Case
A 9-year-old girl presents to the emergency department with complaints of severe headache, abdominal pain,
vomiting, and “dark urine.” Findings during clinical and laboratory evaluation include a blood pressure of
160/110 mmHg and numerous red blood cell casts in the urine. Her parents report that she “had a rash” several
weeks ago, but has otherwise appeared well until the onset of headache 24 hours before presentation. Which of
the following best describes the rash that most likely preceded the onset of this patient’s current clinical and
laboratory findings?

A. An intensely erythematous, tender perianal eruption sharply demarcated from adjacent normal skin
B. Erythematous, weeping lesions associated with yellowish crusting under and around the nose
C. Tender, tense, fluid-filled, blistering lesions overlying the distal volar fat pads of the left great and 2nd toes
D. Bullous lesions along the inner thighs and lower abdomen
E. Tender, grouped, vesiculopustular lesions overlying the distal portion of the right 3 and 4 digits
QUESTION
In a child with acute poststreptococcal glomerulonephritis with a
negative throat culture and no active infection, would you provide
antibiotics?
a) Yes
b) No
Case
A 14-year-old male athlete presents to the clinic after noticing 'tea-colored' urine following a
cross-country race yesterday. He denies flank pain, dysuria, or recent viral illness. He has no
family history of renal disease or deafness. Physical examination is unremarkable, and his blood
pressure is 110/70 mmHg. A urinalysis performed today shows 2+ blood on dipstick and 15-20
RBCs per high-power field, with no protein, casts, or crystals. Which of the following is the most
appropriate next step in management?
A. Obtain a renal and bladder ultrasound
B. Repeat the urinalysis after 48 to 72 hours of rest
C. Order a 24-hour urine collection for calcium and creatinine
D. Perform a serum complement (C3, C4) and ANA screen
Case
A 5-year-old boy presents with a 2-day history of progressive swelling of his abdomen and
genitalia with gross heamaturia. Findings on physical examination include periorbital and scrotal
edema and ascites. Laboratory results include a 24-hour urinary protein excretion of 4 g and a
serum albumin level of 1.8 g/dL. Which of the following complications is most often associated
with the likely cause of this patient’s clinical and laboratory findings?

  A.    Malignant hypertension
  B.    Intussusception
  C.    Heart failure
  D.    Acute urinary retention
  E.    Renal vein thrombosis
