SOURCE: Semester 8\Pedo\Theoritical\PPT\48)Leukemias.pdf

      CAR T- CELLS

BY ASOCIATE PROF . MAHA YOUSSEF
 HAEMATOLOGY ONCOLOGY UNIT
     PAEDIATRIC DEPARTMENT
     ALEXANDRIA UNIVERSITY.
          Discovery of Leukemia
• Craigie and Bennett described a case of suppuration
  of the blood in 1845. Subsequently referred to the
  disease as leukocythemia.
• Rudolph Virchow, also in 1845, described a similar
  case, but did not think this simply pus in the blood
  and related it to simultaneous splenic enlargement.
  Subsequently referred to the disease as Weisses Blut
  (white blood),then suggested the term leukemia
                   Definition
•a clonal expansion and arrest at a specific stage of
normal myeloid or lymphoid hematopoiesis.



•Acute leukemias constitute 97% of all childhood
leukemias.
It consist of the following types:

• Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) 75%
• Acute myeloblastic leukemia (AML), also known
  as acute non-lymphocytic leukemia (ANLL) 20%
• Acute undifferentiated leukemia (AUL) < 0.5%
• Acute mixed-lineage leukemia (AMLL).
• Chronic myeloid leukemias constitute 3% of all
  childhood leukemias and consist of:

   Philadelphia chromosome positive (Ph1
    positive)chronic myeloid leukemia.



   Juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia (JMML).
Characteristic             Acute leukamia     Chronic leukamia


Onset                      Abrupt             Subtle

Morbidity                  Months             Years

Age                        All                Adult

WBCs                       Variable           Elevated

Predominant cells          Blasts and other   Mature
                           immature
                           white cells

Anemia, thrombocytopenia   Present            Variable

neutropinia                Present            Variable

organomegaly               Mild               Marked
INCIDENCE of Acute leukemia:

 ALL: 3–4 cases per 100,000 white children,
  2,500–3,000 children diagnosed in the USA
  per year; AML: 500 new cases in the USA per
  year.
 Peak incidence between 2 and 5 years of age
 Accounts for 25–30% of all childhood
  cancers.
ETIOLOGY:

The etiology of acute leukemia is unknown. The
  following factors are important in the
  pathogenesis of leukemia:
• Ionizing radiation.
• Chemicals (e.g., benzene in AML).
• Drugs (e.g., use of alkylating agents either
  alone or in combination with radiation therapy
  increases the risk of AML)
• Genetic considerations:

 Identical twins – If one twin develops leukemia
 during the first 5 years of life the risk of the
 second twin developing leukemia is 20%

 Incidence of leukemia in siblings of leukemia
 patient is four times greater than that of the
 general population
Chromosomal abnormalities:

   Group              Risk      Time Interval


   Trisomy 21 (Down   1 in 95   <10 years of age
   syndrome)



   Bloom syndrome     1 in 8    <30 years of age


   Fanconi anemia     1 in 12   <16 years of age
 Increased incidence with the following
 genetically determined conditions:

  Congenital agammaglobulinemia
  Poland syndrome
  Shwachman–Diamond syndrome
  Ataxia telangiectasia
  Neurofibromatosis
  Diamond–Blackfan anemia
  Kostmann disease
  Bloom syndrome
• Most cases of leukemia do not originate from
  an inherited genetic predisposition but from
  somatic genetic alterations.
             Acute Leukemias:
        Classification Systems

• French-American-British (FAB):
  – Used from 1970’s-2001
• World Health Organization (WHO):
  – Published 2001
  – Revised version published in 2008
            Acute Leukemias:
         FAB Classification
• Three types of lymphoblastic leukemias
• Eight types of myeloid leukemias
• Based on morphology & cytochemical
  stains
• Does not incorporate cytogenetics,
  phenotype, molecular tests
• Limited prognostic significance
              Acute Leukemias:
           WHO Classification
• Incorporates all types of information about
  leukemias:
   – Immunophenotype
   – Cytogenetics & molecular tests
   – Clinical syndromes
• Definite prognostic & treatment
  significance
ACUTE LYMPHOBLASTIC LEUKEMIA (ALL)
CLINICAL FEATURES OF ACUTE LYMPHOBLASTIC
LEUKEMIA (ALL):
  A)General Systemic Effects:
  1. Fever (60%).
  2. Lassitude (50%).
  3. Pallor (40%).
B)Hematologic Effects Arising from Bone
Marrow Invasion:
 1. Anemia: causing pallor, fatigability,
   tachycardia and dyspnea.
 2. Neutropenia: causing fever, ulceration of
   buccal mucosa and infection.
 3. Thrombocytopenia: causing petechiae,
   purpura, easy bruisability, bleeding from
   mucous membrane and sometimes internal
   bleeding (e.g., intracranial hemorrhage).
4. 1-2% of patients present initially
   withpancytopenia and may be mistakenly
   diagnosed as having aplastic anemia or bone
   marrow failure (represents 5% of acquired aplastic
   anemia) and finally develop acute leukemia. In
   these cases the illness is characterized by:
• Pancytopenia or single cytopenia
• Hypocellular bone marrow
• No hepatosplenomegaly
• Diagnosis of leukemia 1–9 months after onset of
   symptoms.
        Clinical and Laboratory Presenting Features in
                 Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia
Clinical and Laboratory Presenting Features   Percentage of Patients

Symptoms and physical findings
fever                                         61%
Bleeding                                      48%
Bone pain                                     23%
lymphadenopathy                               50%
Splenomegaly                                  63%
hepatosplenomegaly                            68%
Laboratory features
Leukocyte count (mm3)
<10,000                                       53%
10,000-49,000                                 30%
>50,000                                       17%
Clinical and Laboratory Presenting Features       Percentage of Patients

Hemoglobin (g/dl)
<7.0                                              43%
7.0 – 11.0                                        45%
>11.0                                             12%
Platelet count (mm3)
<20,000                                           28%
20,000 -99,000                                    47%
>100,000                                          25%
Lymphoblast morphology
L1                                                84%
L2                                                15%
L3                                                1%

From: Pizzo PA, Poplack DG. Principles and Practice of Pediatric Oncology. 5th ed. Philadelphia:
Lippincott-Williams and Wilkins, 2006, with permission.
C)Clinical Manifestations Arising from
Lymphoid System Infiltration:
1. Lymphadenopathy : sometimes presents
   with bulky mediastinal lymphadenopathy
   causing superior vena cava syndrome. More
   common in T-cell leukemia in adolescents.

2. Splenomegaly.

3. Hepatomegaly.
D)Clinical Manifestations of Extramedullary
Invasion:
A)Central Nervous System (CNS)Involvement:
• This occurs in less than 5% of children with
  ALL at initial diagnosis. It may present with
  the following:

1)Signs and symptoms of raised intracranial
    pressure (e.g., headache, morning vomiting,
    papilledema, bilateral sixth-nerve palsy)

2) Signs and symptoms of parenchymal
   involvement (e.g., focal neurologic signs such
   as hemi paresis, cranial nerve palsies,
   convulsions, cerebellar involvement – ataxia,
   dysmetria, hypotonia, hyperflexia)
3) Hypothalamic syndrome (polyphagia with excessive weight
   gain, hirsutism and behavioral disturbances).

4) Diabetes insipidus (posterior pituitary involvement).

5)Chloromas (myeloid sarcoma)of the spinal cord (very
  infrequent in ALL) : multiple, malignant, localized green
  masses of abnormal cells, usually myeloblasts.
• may present with back pain, leg pain, numbness, weakness,
  Brown–Se´quard syndrome and bladder and bowel sphincter
  problems.

6) CNS hemorrhage:complication that occurs more frequently
   in patients with AML than in ALL. It is caused by:
   • Leukostasis in cerebral blood vessels, leading to leukothrombi,
      infarcts and hemorrhage
   • Thrombocytopenia and coagulopathy, contributing to CNS
      hemorrhage.
Genitourinary Tract Involvement
A)Testicular Involvement
1.Usually presents with painless enlargement of the testis.

2. Occurs in 10–23% of boys during the course of the disease at a median
    time of 13 months from diagnosis.

3. Occult testicular involvement is recognized in 10–33% of boys undergoing
    bilateral wedge biopsies.

4. Risk factors for the development of testicular involvement include:
     T-cell ALL
     Leukocytosis at diagnosis (>20,000/mm3)
     Presence of a mediastinal mass
     Moderate to severe hepatosplenomegaly and lymphadenopathy
     Thrombocytopenia (<30,000/mm3).

B)Ovarian Involvement
1. Occurs very rarely
C)Renal Involvement
1. Occasionally may present with hematuria,
   hypertension and renal failure.

2. Evaluated in many patients by
  ultrasonography; renal involvement more
  common in T-cell ALL or mature B-cell ALL.
D)Gastrointestinal Involvement
1. The gastrointestinal (GI) tract may be involved
  in ALL. The most common manifestation is
  bleeding.
2. Leukemic infiltrates in the GI tract are usually
  clinically silent until terminal stages when
  necrotizing enteropathy might occur. The
  most common site for this is the cecaum
  leading to typhlitis .
E)Bone and Joint Involvement
• Bone pain is one of the initial symptoms in
   25% of patients. It may result from:
• direct leukemic infiltration of the
   periosteum,
• bone infarction,
• or expansion of marrow cavity by leukemic
   cells.
• Radiologic changes occasionally seen
   include:
    Osteolytic lesions involving medullary cavity
     and cortex
    Transverse metaphyseal radiolucent bands
    Transverse metaphyseal lines of increased
     density (growth arrest lines)
    Subperiosteal new bone formation.
F)Skin Involvement
Skin involvement occurs occasionally in neonatal
  leukemia or AML.

G)Cardiac Involvement
One-half to two-thirds of patients have demonstrated
  cardiac involvement at autopsy, although symptomatic
  heart disease occurs in less than 5% of cases.
Pathologic findings may include leukemic infiltrates and
  hemorrhage of the myocardium or the pericardium.

H)Lung Involvement
Lung involvement is uncommon and may be due to
  leukemic infiltrates or hemorrhage.
Diagnosis of ALL :

A)Laboratory Studies:
1. Blood count
a. Hemoglobin:
   Moderate to marked reduction.
   Normocytic; normochromic red cell morphology.
   Low hemoglobin indicates longer duration of leukemia;
    higher hemoglobin indicates a more rapidly proliferating
    leukemia
b. White blood cell count: Low, normal, or increased
Diagnosis:
A)Laboratory Studies:
c. Blood smear:
   Blasts are present on blood smear, Very few to none (in
    patients with leukopenia).
   When the white blood cell (WBC) count is greater than
    10,000/mm3, blasts are usually abundant.
   Eosinophilia is seen uncommonly in children with ALL.
    20% of patients with AML have an increased number of
    basophils.

d. Thrombocytopenia: 92% of patients have platelet
   counts below normal. Serious hemorrhage (GI or
   intracranial) occurs at platelet counts less than
   20,000/mm3.
Diagnosis:
A)Laboratory Studies:

2. Bone marrow:
    Bone marrow is usually replaced by 80–100% blasts.
    Megakaryocytes are usually absent.
    Leukemia must be suspected when the bone marrow contains
     more than 5% blasts.
    The hallmark of the diagnosis of acute leukemia is the blast cell,
     a relatively undifferentiated cell with diffusely distributed
     nuclear chromatin, one or more nucleoli and basophilic
     cytoplasm.
    Special bone marrow studies, which help in detailed cell
     classification, include the following:
        Histochemistry
        Immunophenotyping
        Cytogenetics.
Classification of acute leukemia:

• Acute leukemia can be classified based on:
 morphologic characteristics ,
 cytochemical features ,
 immunologic characteristics,
 cytogenetic and molecular characteristics (WHO)

• Light microscopy, cytochemistry,
  immunophenotyping and cytogenetics are
  necessary studies to characterize leukemic
  subtypes.
Classification:

Morphology:
Light Microscopy:
• Certain morphologic criteria have been
  established to differentiate lymphoblasts from
  myeloblasts . Acute lymphoblastic leukemia
  can be further subclassified
Morphologic Characteristic of Lymphoblasts
and Myeloblasts:
Characteristic          Lymphoblasts          Myeloblasts
size                    10–20 μm              14–20 μm
Nucleus
• shape                 Round or oval         Round or oval
• chromatin             Smooth, homogeneous   Spongy, loose
• nucleoli              0–2 and indistinct    2–5 and distinct “punched-
                                              out”
• nuclear membrane      Smooth, round         Irregular
• nuclear-cytoplasmic   high                  low
ratio
Cytoplasm
• color                 blue                  Blue-gray
• amount                Thin rim              More abundant
• granule               Absent                Present
• aure-rods             Absent                Present
                      Immunophenotype
                       distirbution of ALL




             B-cell                          T-cell




Pre-B cell               Mature B-cell
FLT 3 mutations
          Down Syndrome and AML:

• Down syndrome children with AML, despite
  having an increased frequency of M7
  leukemia, have a markedly superior outcome
  compared to children with non-Down
  Syndrome AML. Down syndrome AML
  patients usually present with
a lower initial WBC,
 no central nervous system involvement and
 fewer cytogenetic abnormalities.
Down Syndrome and AML:

• These patients should be treated with less-
  intensive chemotherapy regimens using
  highdose cytarabine, reduced anthracycline
  and reduced intrathecal therapy. Maintenance
  therapy, cranial radiation and stem cell
  transplantation are not required in the Down
  syndrome AML patients.
Down Syndrome and AML:

• The remission rates are about 90% with event-
  free survival approximating 70–80%. This may
  be partially explained by the increased
  sensitivity of Down syndrome blasts to
  cytarabine because of the GATA1 mutation
  (Erythroid transcription factor essential
  for erythroid and megakaryocytic
  development)seen in these patients.
NEW ERA OF TREATMENT OF CANCER
• For decades, the Foundations of cancer
  treatment have been chemo , radiotherapy.
• These continue to be critical mainstay of
  treatment.
• New categories of treatment have recently
  helped to transform the options of treatment
  for cancer patients.
• IN 2000, emergence of targeted therapy as
  IMATINIB, HERCEPTIN by killing cancer cells
  through homingon specific molecular changes
  seen in these cells.
• Over the past decade , immunotherapy that
  strengthen the power of the patient immune
  system to attack tumors has rapidly become
  what we call FIFTH PILLAR OF CANCER
  TREATMENT.
• These drugs have shown the ability to shrink
  even eradicate tumors in some people.
• Drugs are called immune check point
  inhibitors.
• Since 2017 6 CAR-T ells have been approved
  by FDA , for treatment of
• 1- blood cancers.
• 2- lymphoma.
• 3- multiple myeloma.
       CAR-T cells is a living drug
• It is equivalent of giving a patient a living drug.
• As it name implies T-cells which help
  orchestrate the immune response , directly kill
  cells infected by pathogens which are the
  backbone of CAR –T cell therapy.
• Currently available CAR- T-cells therapies are
  customized for each individual. They are made
  by collecting T cells from the patient ,
  reengineering them in labs to produce
  proteins on their surface called CHIMERIC
  ANTIGEN RECEPTORS.
• Cars recognize .binds to specific proteins or
  antigens on the surface of cancer cells.
• These receptors are synthetic molecules, they
  don’t exist naturally.
• After revamped T-cellsare expanded to millions in
  lab, they are reinfused into the patient.
• I f all goes as planned , CAR T-cells will continue
  to multiply in patient bodywith guidance from
  engineered receptor, recognize, kill any cancer
  cells that harbor or target Ag on their surfaces.
  NEW TREATMENT OPTIONS WHERE
           FEW EXISTED
• The initial development of CAR therapies
  focused on the most common cancer in
  pediatrics which is ALL.
• 2017 FIRST CAR-T cell approved by FDA for
  relapsed ALL .
          MAKING CART –cells
• Each CAR bridges cell membrane part of
  receptor located outside the cell , part in the
  cell.
• The part of CAR that extends from cell surface
  is usu composed of fragments, domains which
  binds to antigen on surface of tumor .
• The internal part of CAR has signalling , co
  stimulatory domains that transmit signals to
  cell after receptor interacts with antigen.
            DRAW BACKS
• 1- cytokine release syndrome.(CRS)
• 2-CONFUSION, SEIZURE LIKE ACTIVITY,
  IMPAIRED SPEECH DT IMMUNE –EFFECTOR
  CELL ASS, NEUROTOXICITY(CANS)
