SOURCE: Semester 8\Pedo\Theoritical\PPT\53) stroke.pdf

Childhood cerebrovascular
        disorders
              Dr/ Shimaa Anwar
  Assistant professor of Paediatric Neurology
  Faculty of Medicine, Alexandria University
Cerebrovascular disease
Intracranial haemorrhage




Extradural haemorrhage
This usually follows direct head trauma
often associated with skull fracture
(tearing of middle meningeal artery)
It results from


arterial or venous bleeding into the extradural space.
 There is often a lucid interval until the conscious level deteriorate
 seizures secondary to increasing size of the haematoma.
 There may be focal neurological signs with dilatation of the
 ipsilateral pupil, paresis of the contralateral limbs
 unilateral or bilateral VIth nerve paresis.
 In young children, initial presentation may be with anaemia and
  shock.
Management

Diagnosis :
a CT scan.
Treatment
is to correct hypovolaemia
urgent evacuation of the haematoma and arrest of the
bleeding.
Subdural haematoma


This results from tearing of the bridging veins as they
cross the subdural space.
1.    It is a characteristic lesion in nonaccidental injury
     caused by shaking or direct trauma in infants and
     toddlers.
2.   Retinal haemorrhages are typical of shaking injury.
3. Subdural haematomas are occasionally seen following
   a fall from a considerable height, and rarely, in
   association with brain shrinkage through atrophy or
   over drainage of hydrocephalus.
Subarachnoid haemorrhage



This is much more common in adults.
Presentation:
A. a severe headache with rapid onset (“thunderclap
   headache”), vomiting
B. Confusion
C. a lowered level of consciousness, coma
D. sometimes seizures
Management

Diagnosis:
A. A CT scan of the head usually identifies blood in the
   CSF.
B. Occasionally a lumbar puncture is required.
C. The cause is often an aneurysm or arteriovenous
   malformation.
D. It can be identified on MR angiography,CT, or
   conventional angiography.
Treatment:
can be neurosurgical or with interventional radiology.
           Childhood stroke



                                haemorrhagic
vascular       thromboembolic
                                   disease
                                                        Aetiology
            Cardiac:                   Haematological: sickle cell
   congenital cyanotic heart            disease; deficiencies of           Postinfective: following
                                                                                                            infections.
           disease.                   antithrombotic factors, e.g.         varicella or other viral
 Fallot tetralogy, endocarditis.              protein S.



                                        Metabolic/genetic:
   Inflammatory: damage to          homocystinuria, mitochondrial
    vessels in autoimmune              disorders, e.g. myoclonic        arteriopathy with subcortical   leukoencephalopathy
disease, e.g. SLE (systemic lupus      epilepsy, lactic acidosis,               infarcts and                 (CADASIL).
        erythematosus).              and stroke (MELAS); cerebral
                                         autosomal dominant



                                         Vascular malformations:
                                     arteriovenous malformation or
                                                                        Trauma: Dissection of carotid
                                      moyamoya disease, in which
                                                                            or vertebral arteries.
                                    there is a progressive involution
                                           of cerebral arteries
The clinical presentation is
determined by the vascular
territory involved.
A.    Commonly the anterior
     circulation (internal
     carotid, anterior cerebral
     arteries and middle
     cerebral arteries), which
     leads to contralateral
     hemiparesis
B.    the posterior
     circulation
(vertebrobasilar arteries) with
associated visual and/or
cerebellar signs.
                   The acute onset of a focal
               neurologic deficit in a child is stroke
                    until proven otherwise.
Presentation
                    The most common focal
                presentation is hemiparesis, but
                acute visual, speech, sensory, or
                  balance deficits also occur.
Investigations
A. MRI

B. MR angiogram, MR venography

C. echocardiography

D. a thrombophilia and vasculitis screen

E. metabolic tests for homocysteine and
    mitochondrial cytopathy.
            1- Given the inadequate safety data, emergency thrombolysis is
            not recommended for children.
            2- Early initiation of antithrombotic strategies is paramount to
            prevent early reinfarction. Depending on the suspected cause, this
            includes
            A.    anticoagulation with heparins or antiplatelet strategies,
                 usually aspirin.
            B.   Hyperacute neuroprotective strategies are essential includes:
Treatment   C.   control of blood glucose
            D.   Temperature control
            E.   seizures control
            F.    maintenance of cerebral perfusion pressure.
            G.   Early management of cerebral oedema
            3- Disease-specific treatments include transfusion therapy in
            sickle cell disease, immunosuppression in vasculitis, and
            revascularization surgery in moyamoya.
Treatment

  Long-term treatment goals include secondary
          stroke prevention, including
• antiplatelet therapy in arteriopathy and anticoagulation in
  cardiogenic causes.
• Multimodal, family-centered rehabilitation programs
  targeting motor deficits, language and intellectual
  impairments, behavioral and social disabilities, and epilepsy.
Thank you
