SOURCE: Semester 8\Pedo\Theoritical\PPT\54) seizures and epilepsy (1).pdf

        Seizures and
          epilepsy
                Prof/ Dr Shimaa Anwar
Associate professor of pediatrics and pediatric neurology
Febrile seizures
    and other
   paroxysmal
    disorders

                       By
                 Shimaa Anwar
 Assistant Professor in Pediatrics and Pediatric
                   Neurology
             Alexandria University
          Definition

          Simple febrile seizures

Objecti   Complex febrile seizures
ves
          Management

          Examples of non-epileptic
          paroxysmal disorders
Febrile seizures



Epileptic    seizure    accompaniedby          a fever   in
       the absence of   intracranial infection
Between      the             ages of    5
      months and             6 years.

Geneticpredisposition


First-degree relative

 Febrile
 seizures(convu
Early in a viral infection
 lsions)

The temperature is rising rapidly


Recurrent
    Simple febrile
    seizures
generalized tonic-clonic seizures

Brief

not repeated in the same illness

No post ictal events

the younger the child,

shorter the duration of illness

the lower the temperature at the time of seizure

and if there is a positive family history.

do not cause brain damage;

1–2% chance of subsequently developing an epilepsy, similar to the risk for all children
complex febrile
seizures
• focal,
• prolonged,
• or repeated in the same illness
• the younger the child,
• shorter the duration of illness
• The lower the temperature at the time of seizure
• increased risk of 4–12% of subsequent epilepsy.
Management
• the cause of the fever
• Lumbar puncture
• Parents need reassurance and information
• Antipyretics
• rescue therapy
• Oral prophylactic antiepileptic drugs
   Epilep
     sy
        Prof/ Shimaa Anwar
Associate professor of pediatrics and
        pediatric neurology
What is
Epilepsy?
(≥ 2 unprovoked
seizures with 24
hours apart)

• Epileptic Seizure:
• Abnormal Excessive neuronal electrical
Activity in the Brain
• → Sudden onset and offset, transient
recurrent neurological symptoms and/or signs
•   The site of origin of the
    abnormal neuronal firing
    determines the symptoms
    produced.

•   e.g. if the motor cortex is
    involved, the patient may
    experience abnormal
    movements (motor seizure)
    …………
Types of Epilepsy
           Types of Epilepsy

   Focal             Generalized



Aware   Unaware   Absence       Myoclonic


                       Tonic-clonic
Focal epilepsy
• Focal seizure manifestations will
  depend on the part of the brain
  where the discharge originates and
  moves to:
          A- focal aware
The patient is conscious.
Associated with motor (eye twitches), sensory (numbness),
visual or psychic changes
             B- focal unaware
An aura :Immediately before loss of consciousness, may be :

 Unusual abdominal sensation.
 Olfactory/visual hallucinations
 Sense of fear
 Impaired consciousness.
 The seizures “Automatism”:
Repeated involuntary movements
lasting for 2-5 min. (lip smacking)

Postictal confusion for several minutes with amnesia except for
the aura
C- focal to bilateral
During the partial seizure, the
epileptiform discharge may spread from the
original focus throughout the cortex
causing a generalized       tonic-clonic
convulsion.
           2- Generalized epilepsy




Involve the whole of both hemispheres with Loss Consciousness
                                  stares blankly into space




       A- Absence

Brief Loss of consciousness. She stares blankly into space,
with eye rolling & cessation of activity for seconds.

With no loss of posture & no aura. May be repeated many
times 50-100 times/day.


Immediately after the seizures, the patient is fully alert.
May be followed by hyperventilation.
Absence Seizures impair
 learning → Academic
 difficulty
           • Tonic contractions of muscles, limb
B-         extension & arching of back, with epileptic
           cry , pallor/cyanosis followed by ..

Tonic-     • Clonic phase of limb jerking & eye rolling,
             with:
clonic     • Tongue biting/Urine Incontinence/Frothing
             from mouth.

seizures   • Postictal coma then confusion &
           amnesia, with gradual regain of
           consciousness (may take several hours)
         C- Myoclonic Epilepsy

   • Myoclonic seizures are brief,         shock-like,
   repetitive jerks of a muscle or a        group of
   muscles.


    • "Myo" means
means        rapidly muscle and "clonus“
                        alternating
contraction     and    relaxation
of a muscle.
C- Myoclonic Epilepsy
             D- epileptic Spasms

 Characterized by large myoclonic jerks
•   (salaam seizures)


 There are at least 3 types of spasms:
•  Flexor, Extensor & Mixed.
• Epilepsy has an incidence of about 0.05% (less common during first
  year of life) and a prevalence of 0.5%.
• Most epilepsy is “genetic” with complex inheritance,
Epilepsy syndromes


• The ILAE recognizes over twenty electro-
  clinical epilepsy syndromes, each defined by a
  distinctive combination of clinical features,
  signs and symptoms, and electrographic
  patterns.


• Epilepsy syndrome classification provides
  prognostic, therapeutic and genetic information.
Epileptic encephalopathies

Epileptic encephalopathies are heterogeneous group of epilepsy syndromes
associated with severe cognitive and behavioral disturbances. These disorders
vary in:
 age of onset
developmental outcome
 etiologies
 neuropsychological deficits, electroencephalographic (EEG) patterns
 seizure type
prognosis,
 but all may have a significant impact on neurological development
The ILAE defined an epileptic encephalopathy as a condition in which "the epileptiform
EEG abnormalities themselves are believed to contribute to a progressive disturbance.
Early myoclonic encephalopathy
Early infantile epileptic encephalopathy (Ohtahara syndrome)
Infantile Spasm ( West Syndrome)
Severe myoclonic epilepsy in infancy (Dravet syndrome)
Migrating partial seizures in infancy
Myoclonic status in nonprogressive encephalopathies
Lennox-Gastaut syndrome ( LGS)
Landau-Kleffner syndrome ( LKS)
Epilepsy with continuous spike-waves during slow wave sleep (CSWS)
The causes of epileptic encephalopathy vary among the different syndromes.
Epileptic spasms (west syndrome)
    Epileptic spasm is an age-specific epilepsy syndrome of infancy and early
    childhood characterized by a triade of
    epileptic spasms
     interictal EEG pattern of hypsarhythmia
     developmental regression
    although the diagnosis can be made even if 1 of the 3 elements is missing
Classification of epileptic spasms:
• Symptomatic IS: these patients have an identified etiology and/or significant developmental delay
  at the time of spasm onset.
• Cryptogenic IS: these patients have no known etiology and normal development at the time of
  spasm onset.
• Genetic: an abnormality in the short arm of chromosome X.
Age of onset of epileptic spasms
• The majority (90 percent) of affected children present at less than one year of age
  with a range from one day to 4.5 years of age. The peak incidence of onset (50 to
  77 percent) is between three and seven months; onset after 18 months is rare.
The clinical types of spasms:
 Flexor
Extensor spasms
Mixed flexor-extensor spasms
Treatment of epileptic spasms:
• The major options for treatment of IS include hormonal therapy, mainly corticotropin (ACTH), and
  antiepileptic medication, mainly vigabatrin. Pyridoxine
• Anticonvulsant drugs including vigabatrin, valproate, zonisamide and topiramate
• Ketogenic diet
Lennox-Gastaut syndrome


• Patients usually present before eight years of age, most commonly between three and five years of
  age.

• Some children with LGS begin having seizures before reaching the age of one year, and many
  cases evolve into LGS from other epilepsy syndromes, particularly West syndrome or infantile
  spasms
The syndrome is characterized by:
• Multiple seizure types, particularly tonic and atypical absence seizures, but also atonic and
  myoclonic seizures. Periods of nonconvulsive status epilepticus occur in most cases at some stage.
• A slow (less than 2.5 Hertz) spike-wave pattern on the interictal EEG that is generalized and
  usually has highest amplitude in the frontal region (also called an "atypical spike and wave"
  pattern).
• Intellectual disability (occasionally progressive) with or without other neurologic abnormalities.
  Psychotic symptoms are common. Often neurodevelopment is normal before the first seizure.
This syndrome has many causes, including genetic disorders
• neurocutaneous syndromes
• (eg, tuberous sclerosis)
• hypoxic-ischemic insults
• meningitis, and head injuries.
• Approximately 40 percent of patients have an unknown etiology, although these children are
  increasingly found to have genetic disorders, particularly chromosomal syndromes or de novo
  mutations.
• Up to 25 percent of children with LGS have a history of infantile spasms
The optimal therapy for LGS
• Valproate, lamotrigine, topiramate, rufinamide, felbamate, and clobazam may be
  helpful
• The ketogenic diet
• surgical options, including corpus callosotomy or lesional epilepsy
Benign childhood epilepsy with centrotemporal spikes (BCECTS) or benign
rolandic epilepsy


• BCECTS makes up about 10 to 20 percent of all childhood epilepsies and has a mean age of onset
  between seven and nine years.

• The most common seizure type is a simple focal seizure with motor symptoms that initially involve
  the face, often with progression of the motor seizures to other areas of the body (the so-called
  Jacksonian march).

• Seizures are more common at night and the characteristic EEG abnormality of centrotemporal
  spikes is also more prominent in sleep recordings. In most cases, seizures remit within two years.
Panayiotopoulos syndrome

• It presents at a mean age of less than five years with a distinctive seizure type that
  has prominently autonomic features, including vomiting and skin pallor.
• The seizures are usually nocturnal and last more than five minutes.
• One-third to one-half of episodes last more than 30 minutes.
Benign focal epilepsies in infancy

A number of benign focal epilepsy syndromes, both familial and sporadic, have
been described in infancy.
Juvenile myoclonic epilepsy

• Juvenile myoclonic epilepsy (JME) is frequently diagnosed in pediatric epilepsy clinics but is often
  not recognized by referring clinicians.
• Typically, the patient is a healthy young teenager with one or more of the following seizure types:
• Myoclonic jerks (most frequent in the morning, within the first hour after awakening)
• Absence seizures (often precede the other seizures and begin toward the end of the first decade)
• Generalized tonic-clonic seizures, which also have a tendency to occur upon awakening
Absence epilepsies

• Absence seizures are a common pediatric seizure type associated with a range of generalized
  epilepsy syndromes. Typical absence seizures consist of brief staring episodes with behavioral
  arrest that may occur tens to hundreds of times daily.
• They are associated with generalized 3-Hertz spike-and-slow-wave discharges on
  electroencephalogram (EEG).
• Atypical absence seizures have a less clear time of onset and resolution than typical absence
  seizures, and they are often manifest as less complete periods of activity arrest but with impairment
  of responsiveness or other behavioral changes
• with ethosuximide, valproic acid, lamotrigine, and clonazepam considered to be the most effective
  AEDs
Diagnosis

• Diagnosis The diagnosis of an epilepsy is primarily based on a detailed history
  from the child and eyewitnesses, substantiated by a video if available.
• This is increasingly provided on mobile phones.
• Particular attention is focused on any specific triggers and if the child has any
  impairments, as there may be educational, psychological, or social problems.
• Clinical examination should include checking for skin markers for a neuro
  cutaneous syndrome or neurological abnormalities. Although epilepsy is
  usually genetic (idiopathic), it may be the presentation or a complication of an
  underlying neurological disorder.
• Investigation Remember not all seizures are epileptic! ECG as the
  consequences of missing convulsive syncope due to an arrhythmia, e.g.
  long-QT syndrome, can be an avoidable fatality .
• EEG (electroencephalogram)
Brain imaging
• Structural. MRI and CT brain scans are generally required routinely for
  childhood epilepsies unless there is a characteristic history of childhood
  absence epilepsy, juvenile absence epilepsy, juvenile myoclonic epilepsy, and
  childhood rolandic epilepsy.
• MRI
• These include PET (positron emission tomography) and SPECT (single
  photon emission computed tomography),
• Other investigations Metabolic investigations will be indicated if there
  is developmental arrest or regression, or seizures are related to feeds
  or fasting, and should be considered in epilepsies (i.e. not including
  febrile seizures) starting in the first 2 years of life.
• Genetic tests are becoming increasingly useful, especially in intractable
  epilepsies with developmental arrest or delay (“epileptic
  encephalopathies”).
• Management Management begins with diagnosis, but this is often uncertain initially.
• So the uncertainty needs explaining and a plan put in place to ensure the child’s
  safety until more information, e.g. from investigations or parental video clips is
  available.
• Once diagnosed, a clear explanation of the diagnosis and advice to help adjustment to
  the condition is needed.
• A specialist epilepsy nurse may assist families by providing edu cation and continuing
  advice on lifestyle issues.
• The decision whether to treat or not is related to the risk of recurrence, how dangerous
  or impairing, and how upsetting further seizures would be, in the context of the child or
  young person’s life.
Principles of treatment
• Choose an appropriate AED for the seizure and epilepsy.
• Inappropriate AEDs may be detrimental, e.g. carbamazepine
  can make absence and myoclonic seizures worse.
• Monotherapy /polytherapy
• All AEDs have potential unwanted effects and these should be
discussed with the child and parent.
• AED levels are not measured routinely (compliance)
Principles of treatment
• Children with prolonged epileptic seizures (convulsive epileptic
seizures with loss of consciousness >5min) are given rescue
therapy to keep with them. This is usually buccal midazolam.
• AED therapy may be discontinued after 2 years free of seizures,
but should usually be continued indefinitely in young people with
juvenile absence epilepsy or juvenile myoclonic epilepsy.
Treatment
Side
effects
Other treatment options
• In children with intractable epilepsies
• • Ketogenic (low-carb, fat-based)
• • Vagal nerve stimulation
• • Epilepsy surgery
Status epilepticus
• The ILAE defines status epilepticus (SE) as either 5 or more
  minutes of continuous seizure activity or recurrent seizures
  without regaining baseline consciousness.
Thank you
