SOURCE: Semester 8\Pedo\Theoritical\PPT\6) Genetically determined disease_.pdf

GENETICALLY DETERMINED DISEASES WITH

CHROMOSOMAL ABNORMALITIES



     Dr. Iman Marzouk

     Professor of Pediatrics

     Faculty of Medicine

     Alexandria University
     Genetic disorders are common:

Two percent of live born babies have a significant
 congenital malformation and about 5% have a
                genetic disorder.
      Genetically determined diseases can result from one of the
      following:

1.     Chromosomal abnormalities either numerical or structural.

2.     Single gene disorder following Mendelian inheritance (Autosomal and

                          Loading…
     sex linked either recessive or dominant inheritance)

3.     Unusual genetic mechanisms (Fragile X, Mitochondrial, imprinting and
     uniparental disomy).

4.     Interaction of genetic and environmental factors (multifactorial,
     epigenetic influence on the expression of the gene early in life)
● Genes are composed of DNA that is wound around a core of histone

 proteins and packaged into a succession of supercoils to form
 chromosomes.

● Chromosomes are the vehicles which facilitate reproduction and the

 maintenance of a species. They are best seen by special stains
 selectively taken by DNA during cell division when chromosomes are
 maximally contracted.

● At this time, each chromosome is made up of two chromatids. Each

 chromatid is formed from long (q) arm and short (p) arm. They are
 joined at the centromere, which consist of DNA and responsible for
 the movements of the chromosomes during cell division.
According to the position of the centromere chromosomes are divided

into:

• Meta centric: if located centrally.

• Acrocentric: if terminal with satellite formed from



•
                          Loading…
      repeated copies of the genes for r RNA.

    Sub-metacentric: in an intermediate position.



In humans the normal cell nucleus contains 46 chromosomes made up of:

     • 22 pairs of autosomes .

     • A single pair of sex chromosomes- XX in female and XY in male.

One member of each of the pairs is derived from each parent.
Somatic   cells are said to have diploid complement         of 46
chromosomes where gametes have haploid complement of 23

chromosomes.
Members of a pair of chromosomes are known as homologues.




                                                     Karyotype:
                                                         46,XY
• Chromosomal abnormalities either numerical (trisomy and

 monosomy) or structural (translocation, deletion and

 duplications).

• They occur in approximately 10% of spermatozoa and 25%

 of mature oocytes and are a common cause of spontaneous
 miscarriage.

• The estimated incidence of chromosomal abnormalities in

 live born is about 1 in 150; they cause multiple congenital
 anomalies and cognitive difficulties.
         Disorders of chromosomal number
            Down Syndrome (trisomy 21)

DS is the most common autosomal trisomy and the
most common genetic cause of severe learning
difficulties. Its incidence is about 1 in 650 live born
infants and increases with maternal age.
47,XX +
     21
   Prominent forehead, flat face, short nose with flat nasal bridge,
Up slanting palpebral fissures , epicanthic folds and protruded tongue.
            Simian crease
Hypotonia                     Neck

        Loading…            webbing
  Diagnosis of Down Syndrome

• If the condition was not diagnosed antenatal, DS is suspected at birth

 because of the facial appearance and hypotonia in addition to the
 developmental delay which will be noticed later on.

• The diagnosis should be confirmed by chromosomal analysis


 (karyotype or FISH technique) which will help in proper genetic
 counseling after identification of the genetic type and calculation of
 the recurrence risk.
  Craniofacial appearance of DS:       Other anomalies:


o Round face and flat nasal bridge.    o Short neck

o Upslanting of palpebral features.    o Single palmar crease, incurved short

o Epicanthic folds.                     finger and wide gap between the first

o Brushfield spots.                     and second toes.

o Small mouth and protruding tongue.   o Hypotonia

o Small ears.                          o Congenital heart defects (40%)


o Flat occiput.                        o Duodenal atresia

                                       o Hirschsprung disease.
 Later clinical problems:
• Delayed motor mile stones

• Learning difficulties with variable degree of severity.

• Short stature

• Increased susceptibility to infection

• Conductive hearing defects (75%)

• Visual impairment; cataract (15%), squint and myopia (50%)

• Increased risk of leukemia and solid tumors <1%

• Acquired hip dislocation and atlantoaxial instability.



• Obstructive sleep apnea (50-75%)

• Increased risk of hypothyroidism (15%) and celiac disease.

• Epilepsy

• Early onset Alzheimer disease.
Cytogenetics of DS

The extra chromosome 21 may results from
  o Meiotic non disjunction (94%)

  o Translocation (4%)

  o Mosaicism (1%)
              Meiotic non disjunction (94%)

• Most cases results from an error at meiosis

• The chromosome 21 pair falls to separate, so one gamete

 has two chromosomes 21s and the other has none.

• Fertilization of the gamete with two chromosomes 21s gives

 rise a zygote with trisomy 21.

• Parental chromosomes do not need to be examined.

• The incidence of trisomy 21 is related to maternal age.


 However as the proportion of pregnancy in older mothers is

 small, most of the affected babies born to younger mothers.
    Prenatal diagnosis of DS
• Non invasive measures (10-14 weeks of gestation) by:

     • screening of maternal blood samples for biochemical markers.

     • Nuchal translucency on ultrasound (thickening of the soft tissue at

      the back of the neck)

•    when an increased risk is identified, amniocentesis      or chorionic

    villous sample is offered to check fetal karyotype.

• Recently,     prenatal cell-free fetal DNA is analyzed from maternal

    blood.
The risk of recurrence after having one child with
trisomy 21 due to non disjunction is 1 in 200 for
mothers under the age of 35 years, but remain similar
to their age related risk for those above 35years.
           Maternal age                Incidence

             20 years                   1:1530

             30 years                   1:500

             35 years                   1:350

             40 years                   1:110

             45 years                    1:37
Translocation (5%)
• This occurs when the extra copy of chromosome 21 joined

 into another chromosome (usually 14, but may be 15,22,13
 or 21) what is called Robertsonian translocation.

• Parental chromosome analysis is recommended as they may

 be normal in 75% of the cases and the risk of recurrence is

 less than 1%.

• In 25% of the cases one of the parents is a balanced carrier

 of this translocation. The risk of recurrence is 10-15% if the
                    46,XY
                  t(15,21)




46, XX t(21,22)
 Mosaicism (1%)
• In mosaicism, some of the cells are normal and some have

 trisomy 21.
• This   usually occurs by mitotic non disjunction after
 formation of a zygote with normal chromosomes. It may
 also occur by later mitotic non disjunction in a trisomy 21
 conception and loss of the extra copy of chromosome in
 cell line.
• The phenotype is sometimes milder in DS mosaicism.
            Turner Syndrome (TS)

• It is a chromosomal monosomy syndrome of short

 female with sexual infantilism and certain physical
 abnormalities.

• More than 95% of 45X0 fetuses abort spontaneously,

 despite this TS incidence is 1: 2500 live born females.

• Turner syndrome is increasingly detected prenatally by

 ultrasound when fetal edema of the neck, hands or feet
 or a cystic hygroma may be identified
Short webbed neck in the TS neonate      wide spaced nipples




  Edema of the dorsum of the hands and feet in a neonate with TS
A girl with TS shows
short stature,
receding chin and neck
webbing.
 Clinical features of Turner Syndrome
• Lymphedema of the hands and feet in neonate, which may

 persist.

• Spoon shaped nails

• Short stature. ( Growth hormone therapy)

• Neck webbing.

• Wide carrying angle.

• Widely spaced nipples.

• Congenital heart defects (coarctation of the aorta)
  Cytogenetics of TS:

• In about 50% of girls with TS have a single X chromosome


 (45,X0).

• The other half have a single normal X and the other X may

 have short arm deletion or isochromosome with two long
 arms and no short arm or any of the structural abnormalities.

 Also there may be mosaicism like 46XX/45X0.

• The presence of Y chromosome sequence may increase the

 risk of gonadoblastoma, so gonadectomy is indicated.
 Structural chromosomal abnormalities
 Reciprocal translocation:
It is the exchange of genetic material between two different chromosomes. It
may be:

Balanced reciprocal translocation: with no loss or gain of the genetic

material . It occurs in 1 in 500 of the general population. It may involve the
loss of few genes or disruption of a single gene and result in an abnormal
phenotype mainly in the form of cognitive difficulties.
Unbalanced reciprocal translocation: contain an incorrect amount
of chromosomal material and often impair both physical and cognitive
development     leading     to    dysmorphic    features,      congenital
malformation, developmental delay and learning difficulties.

• The identification of unbalanced translocation in a new born, the


                  Loading…
 paternal chromosomes should be examined to identify if it is de
 novo condition or caused by balanced translocation of one of the
 parents with risk of recurrence in the future pregnancies. Prenatal
 diagnosis is important in this situation.
  Deletions:
• Loss of a part of chromosome usually results in physical abnormalities

 and cognitive impairment. The deletion may involve the terminal or
 interstitial part of the chromosome.

• Parental chromosomal analysis is indicated in the presence of deletion


 in a baby like partial deletion of the short arm of chromosome 5 (5p-)
 to identify if the condition is de novo or one of the parents is a carrier
 of balanced rearrangement.
46,XX 5p-
Duplications:

Gain of the genetic material can lead to congenital
malformations and intellectual impairment although
duplications are often better tolerated than deletions.
                     Dysmorphology

It is the study of abnormal form and
refers to the assessment of birth defects
and unusual physical features that have
their origin during embryogenesis.


Pathogenic mechanisms:
                                            Cleft palate
1- Malformation:
it is a primary structural defect occurs
during the development of tissues or
2- Deformation:
It implies an abnormal intrauterine mechanical force that
distorts a normally formed structures.




                    Talipes equinovarus
3- Disruption:
It involves destruction of a fetal part initially formed
normally.




` Amniotic bands causing limb reduction defects
4- Dysplasia:
It refers to abnormal cellular prganization or function
of specific tissue types.




                  Ectodermal dysplasia
 Clinical classification of birth defects:
1- Single system defects:
These include single congenital; malformation such as
spina bifida, which often multifactorial with fairly low
recurrence risk.



      Anencephaly
2- Sequence:
It refers to a pattern of multiple abnormalities occurring
after one initiating defect like Potter sequence of fetal
compression, pulmonary hypoplasia as a result of severe
oligohydramnios in fetal renal agenesis.
3- Association:
it is a group of malformations that occur together more
often   than   expected   by   chance   but   in   different
combinations with no explanation on the basis of sequence
or a syndrome.



                                        VACTERL association
4- Syndrome:
It is a set of multiple anomalies occurs repeatedly in a
consistent pattern and with a known or thought to be a
common underlying causal mechanism. It is usually
associated with moderate to severe cognitive impairment
and may be due to:
• Chromosomal defects.

• A single gene defect.
                               Patau syndrome (trisomy 13)
• Exposure to teratogens.

• Unknown.
GENETICALLY DETERMINED DISEASES WITH
A SINGLE GENE DISORDER
                     Mendelian inheritance

• It is the transmission of inherited traits or diseases caused

 by variation in a single gene in a characteristic pattern.
• The Mendelian traits or disorders are individually rare but

 collectively numerous and important. Over 6000 have
 described so far.
                     Family studies

• If we wish to investigate whether a particular trait or

 disorder in humans is hereditary, we usually have to rely
 either on observation of the way in which it is transmitted
 from generation to another, or on the study of frequency
 among relatives.
• A family pedigree is a shorthand system to record this. It

 usually begins with the person through whom the family
 came to the attention of the investigator. This person is
 referred to as index case or proband, its position is
• Affected female, male and unknown sex.



• Unaffected female, male and unknown sex.


• Carrier female


• Mating and consanguineous mating


• Abortion
                   Examples of pedigree symbols
     Autosomal dominant inheritance (AD)

This is the most common type of Mendelian

inheritance caused by alteration in only one copy of
a gene pair. The condition appear in heterozygote
state despite the presence of intact copy of the
relevant gene.
The mutation is usually coming from previous
generations or develop as new mutation.
Characters of AD disease with complete penetrance

 • Male to male transmission is present.
 • Both males and females are affected.

 • Affected offspring has chance ½ (50%) for both sexes to
  inherit the mutant gene.
 • If an individual is not affected, his children will show no
  signs of the condition.
 • The affected individual may inherit the disorder from a
  parent or develop the condition as a new mutation.
         Family pedigree of an AD trait


                                                      I


                                                     II

                                                      III


                                                      IV


Normal female                        Normal male
Affected female                      Affected male
 Examples of AD diseases

• Achondroplasia.

• Adult polycystic kidney disease.

• Myotonic dystrophy.


• Noonan’s syndrome.

• Familial hypercholesterolemia.



                                     Achondroplasia
Variation in expression
Characters of AD disease with reduced penetrance

• The same as AD inheritance with the exception that some

  individuals show no signs of the disease although they
  must carry the abnormal gene (Someone who was


  completely unaffected had both a parent and a child with
  the same AD disorder = skipping a generation).
• Penetrance is usually quoted as a percent; 80% means that

  80% of all heterozygotes will express the condition in
  some way.
I-

II-

III-


       Lack of penetrance in AD disorder.
The offspring of couples who are heterozygous for a
dominantly inherited disorder are at risk of being
homozygous.
Homozygous individuals may get:
  • More severely affected (achondroplasia).

  • Earlier age of onset   (familial

   hypercholesterolemia).
  • No more severely affected (Huntington disease).
    Characteristics of Autosomal Recessive (AR) inheritance

• The parents are normal while sibs are affected.

•    Consanguinity in parents is more common than in the
    general population.
• When one parent only of affected child is heterozygote;

    either a new mutation occurred on the gamete inherited
    from the other parent or; in uniparental disomy when the

    child inherit 2 copies of the heterozygote mutant allele.
Family pedigree of an AR trait




 Affected



            Consanguineous mating
 Examples of AR disorders:

• Cystic fibrosis.

• Hurler’s syndrome (MPS1).

• Phenylketonuria.

• Galactosaemia.

• Thalassemia.

• Gaucher disease.
               Sex- linked recessive disorder

    Sex-linked inheritance refers to the pattern of
inheritance shown by genes that are located on either of
the sex chromosomes.

  Genes carried on the X chromosome referred to as
being X-linked, while genes carried on the Y
chromosome are referred to as exhibiting Y-linked
inheritance.
                   X-linked recessive inheritance

• In severe X- linked conditions, affected males often don’t survive long

 enough to have their own children. Consequently, these conditions are
 usually transmitted only by healthy female carriers.

• The carrier transmits the gene to ½ of her daughters (carriers) and ½ of

 her sons (affected).

• If affected male has children, he will transmit his Y chromosome to all

 his sons (unaffected) and his X to all his daughters (carriers).

• An obligate carrier female is a woman with at least one affected son and

 at least one affected male relative in the female line; or a female with 2
 affected sons. Daughters of affected males are all obligate carriers.
  I-



II-

III-

IV-

       The pedigree of X linked recessive disorder
Examples of X linked recessive disorders:

• Hemophilia A,B.

• Color blindness.

• G6PD deficiency.

• Ocular albinism.

• Hunter’s disease (MPSII).

• Duchenne muscular dystrophy.
                         The isolated case
    If a woman has only one affected son, there are 3 possibilities
•         She is a carrier; there is a risk ½ that any future sons will
        be affected.
•         The disorder in the son arose as a new mutation during
        meiosis in the gamete which led to his conception;
        negligible risk of recurrence in other sons.
•         The woman has a gonadal mosaicism for the mutation
        that occurred during early mitotic division of her own
        embryonic      development;     variable    recurrence    risk
        occurring according to the proportion of the ova that carry
                        X-linked dominant inheritance
● Although uncommon, there are disorders that are manifest in

    the heterozygous female as well as in the male who has the
    mutant allele on his single X chromosome.
● The affected male transmits the trait to all his daughters but

    none of his sons.
●    Therefore, the families with X- linked dominant disorder
    there is an excess of affected females and direct male to male
    transmission cannot occur (vitamin D resistant rickets).
                       Y-linked inheritance


• Only males are affected.

• An affected male transmits Y-linked traits to all his sons

 but to none of his daughters.
• Ex: hairy ears and webbed toes.

• Mutations    of   Y-linked      genes    determine   sexual
 differentiation and spermatogenesis are associated with
 infertility, so are rarely transmitted.
Thank You
