SOURCE: Semester 8\Pedo\Theoritical\PPT\8) COMMON PROBLEMS IN THE TERM NEWBORN.pdf

COMMON PROBLEMS
   IN THE TERM
    NEWBORN
   DR HASSAN HESHMAT
 ASSISTANT PROFESSOR OF PEDIATRICS
    DIVISION OF NEONATOLOGY
                 NEONATAL JAUNDICE
                GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS

 Sixty five percent of newborns develop visible jaundice with a total serum
  bilirubin (TSB) level higher than 6 mg/dL during the first week of life.
 Approximately       8%–10%     of     newborns      develop     excessive
  hyperbilirubinemia.
 Extremely high and potentially dangerous TSB levels are rare but can cause
  kernicterus, characterized by injury to the basal ganglia and brainstem.
                          BILIRUBIN METABOLISM


 Bilirubin is produced by the breakdown of heme (iron protoporphyrin) in the
  reticuloendothelial system and bone marrow.
 Heme is cleaved by heme oxygenase to iron, which is conserved; carbon monoxide,
  which is exhaled; and biliverdin, which is converted to bilirubin by bilirubin reductase.
 This unconjugated bilirubin is bound to albumin and carried to the liver, where it is taken
  up by hepatocytes.
 In the presence of the enzyme uridyl diphosphoglycyronyl transferase (UDPGT;
  glucuronyl transferase), bilirubin is conjugated to one or two glucuronide molecules.
                     BILIRUBIN METABOLISM


 Conjugated bilirubin is then excreted through the bile to the intestine. In
  the presence of normal gut flora, conjugated bilirubin is metabolized and
  excreted in the stool.
 Absence of gut flora and slow GI motility, both characteristics of the
  newborn, cause stasis of conjugated bilirubin in the intestinal lumen, where
  mucosal βglucuronidase removes the glucuronide molecules and leaves
  unconjugated bilirubin to be reabsorbed (enterohepatic circulation).
                   TYPES OF HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA


 Excess accumulation of bilirubin in blood depends on both the rate of bilirubin production
  and the rate of excretion.
 It is best determined by comparing an hour specific TSB level to a standard curve of TSB
  concentration by age in hours.
 Serum bilirubin can be fractionated to quantify an unconjugated and conjugated component.
 Most of the neonatal jaundice presenting in the first week of life is due to unconjugated
  hyperbilirubinemia.
 Jaundice due to conjugated hyperbilirubinemia is seen in some congenital infections,
  intrahepatic cholestasis, or extrahepatic obstruction of the biliary tract.
                             PHYSIOLOGIC JAUNDICE

ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS & TYPICAL FEATURES
 Visible jaundice appearing after 24 hours of age.
 Total bilirubin rises by < 5 mg/dL (86 mmol/L) per day.
 Peak bilirubin occurs at 3–5 days of age, with a total bilirubin of no more
  than 15 mg/dL (258 mmol/L).
 Visible jaundice resolves by 1 week in the fullterm infant and by 2 weeks
  in the preterm infant.
Factors contributing to physiologic jaundice in neonates include low UDPGT activity, relatively high red cell mass,
absence of intestinal flora, slow intestinal motility, and increased enterohepatic circulation of bilirubin in the first
days of life.
             PATHOLOGIC UNCONJUGATED
                 HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA

 Pathologic unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia can be grouped into two main
  categories: overproduction of bilirubin or decreased conjugation of
  bilirubin.
 The TSB is a reflection of the balance between these processes. Visible
  jaundice with a TSB greater than 5 mg/dL before 24 hours of age is most
  commonly a result of significant hemolysis.
           CAUSES OF PATHOLOGIC UNCONJUGATED
                   HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA.
Overproduction of bilirubin
1. Hemolytic causes of increased bilirubin production (reticulocyte count elevated)
a. Immune mediated:Positive direct antibody (DAT, Coombs) test
       ABO blood group incompatibility,
       Rh incompatibility,
       minor blood group antigen incompatibility


b. Nonimmune: negative direct antibody (DAT, Coombs) test
       Abnormal red cell shapes: spherocytosis, elliptocytosis, pyknocytosis, stomatocytosis
       Red cell enzyme abnormalities: glucose6phosphate
       Dehydrogenase deficiency, pyruvate kinase deficiency, hexokinase deficiency, other
       Metabolic defects
CAUSES OF PATHOLOGIC UNCONJUGATED
        HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA.

2. Nonhemolytic causes of increased bilirubin production (reticulocyte count normal)
a. Extravascular hemorrhage: cephalohematoma, extensive bruising, intracranial hemorrhage
b. Polycythemia
c. Exaggerated enterohepatic circulation of bilirubin: bowel obstruction, functional ileus
d. Breastfeeding–
     Associated jaundice (inadequate intake of breast milk causing exaggerated enterohepatic circulation of bilirubin)
Decreased rate of conjugation
1. CriglerNajjar
     Syndrome (rare, severe)
a. Type I glucuronyl transferase deficiency, autosomalrecessive
b. Type II glucuronyl transferase deficiency, autosomaldominant
2. Gilbert syndrome (common, milder)
3. Hypothyroidism
               A. INCREASED BILIRUBIN PRODUCTION


            1. Antibody mediated hemolysis (Coombs test–positive)
A. ABO BLOOD GROUP INCOMPATIBILITY

 This finding can accompany any pregnancy in a type O mother. Hemolysis is usually mild, but the
  severity is unpredictable because of variability in the amount of naturally occurring maternal anti-A
  or anti-B IgG antibodies.
 Although 15% of pregnancies are “setups” for ABO incompatibility (mother O, infant A or B), only
  33% of infants in such cases have a positive direct Coombs test and less than 10% of these infants
  develop jaundice that requires therapy.
 Since maternal antibodies may persist for several months after birth, the newborn may become
  progressively more anemic over the first few weeks of life, occasionally to the point of requiring
  transfusion.
                                                B. RH-ISOIMMUNIZATION


 This hemolytic process is less common, more severe, and more predictable than ABO incompatibility.
 The severity increases with each immunized pregnancy.
    Most Rhdisease can be prevented by giving hightiter Rho (D) immune globulin to the Rhnegative woman after invasive procedures during
    pregnancy or after miscarriage, abortion, or delivery of an Rhpositive infant.
 Affected neonates are often anemic at birth, and continued hemolysis rapidly causes hyperbilirubinemia and worsening anemia.
 The most severe form of Rhisoimmunization, erythroblastosis fetalis, is characterized by lifethreatening anemia, generalized edema, and fetal
  or neonatal heart failure.
 Without antenatal intervention, fetal or neonatal death often results. The cornerstone of antenatal management is transfusion of the fetus
  with Rhnegative cells, either directly into the umbilical vein or into the fetal abdominal cavity. Phototherapy is usually started in these infants
  upon delivery, with exchange transfusion frequently needed.
    Intravenous immune globulin (IVIG) given to the infant as soon as the diagnosis is made may decrease the need for exchange transfusion.
    Ongoing hemolysis occurs until all maternal antibodies are gone; therefore, these infants require monitoring for 2–3 months for recurrent
    anemia.
                     HEREDITARY SPHEROCYTOSIS



A. HEREDITARY SPHEROCYTOSIS
 This condition is the most common of the red cell membrane defects and causes
  hemolysis by decreasing red cell deformability.
 Affected infants may have hyperbilirubinemia severe enough to require exchange
  transfusion.
 Splenomegaly may be present.
 Diagnosis is suspected by peripheral blood smear and family history
                            G6PD DEFICIENCY



 This condition is the most common red cell enzyme defect causing hemolysis, especially
  in infants of African, Mediterranean, or Asian descent. Although the disorder is Xlinked,
  female heterozygotes are also at increased risk of hyperbilirubinemia due to X-
  chromosome inactivation. Their increased bilirubin production is further exaggerated by a
  decreased rate of bilirubin conjugation. Since G6PD enzyme activity is high in
  reticulocytes, neonates with a large number of reticulocytes may have falsely normal
  enzyme tests. A low G6PD level should always raise suspicion. Repeat testing in suspect
  cases with initially normal results is indicated at3 months of age
     3- NONHEMOLYTIC INCREASED BILIRUBIN
               PRODUCTION


 Enclosed hemorrhage, such as cephalohematoma, intracranial hemorrhage,
  or extensive bruising in the skin, can lead to jaundice.
 Polycythemia leads to jaundice by increased red cell mass, with increased
  numbers of cells reaching senescence daily.
 Bowel obstruction, functional or mechanical, leads to an increased
  enterohepatic circulation of bilirubin.
                 Decreased Rate of Conjugation
1-UDPGT deficiency: Crigler Najjar syndrome type I (complete deficiency, autosomal
         recessive) and type II (partial deficiency, autosomal dominant)



 These rare conditions result from mutations in the UDPGT gene that
  cause complete or nearly complete absence of enzyme activity. Both can
  cause severe unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia, bilirubin encephalopathy,
  and death if untreated.
 In type II, the enzyme can be induced with phenobarbital, which may lower
  bilirubin levels by 30%–80%. Liver transplantation is curative.
                      2. GILBERT SYNDROME


 This is a common mild autosomal dominant disorder characterized by decreased
  hepatic UDPGT activity caused by genetic polymorphism at the promoter region
  of the UDPGT gene.
 Approximately 9% of the population is homozygous, and 42% is heterozygous for
  this abnormality.
 Affected individuals tend to develop hyperbilirubinemia in the presence of
  conditions that increase bilirubin load and are more likely to have prolonged
  neonatal jaundice and breastmilk jaundice.
  C. Hyperbilirubinemia Caused by Unknown or Multiple Factors




1. Racial differences
 Asians (23%) are more likely than whites (10%–13%) or African Americans (4%) to have a peak neonatal
  TSB greater than 12 mg/dL (206 mmol/L). It is likely that these differences result from racial variations in
  prevalence of UDPGT gene polymorphisms or associated G6PD deficiency.

2. Prematurity
 Premature infants often have poor enteral intake, delayed stooling, and increased enterohepatic
  circulation, as well as a shorter red cell life.
 Infants at 35–36 weeks’ gestation are 13 times more likely than term infants to be readmitted for
  hyperbilirubinemia.
                        BREASTFEEDING AND JAUNDICE

A.BREAST-FEEDING–ASSOCIATED JAUNDICE
 This common condition has also been called “lack of breastmilk” jaundice. Breastfed infants have a higher
  incidence (9%) of elevated unconjugated serum bilirubin levels compared to formula fed infants (2%).
 The pathogenesis is probably poor enteral intake and increased enterohepatic circulation. Excessive jaundice
  should be considered a possible sign of failure to establish an adequate milk supply. The best way to evaluate
  successful breastfeeding is to monitor the infant’s weight, urine, and stool output.
 If intake is inadequate, the infant should receive supplemental formula and the mother should be instructed
  to nurse more frequently and to use an electric breast pump every 2 hours to enhance milk production.
 Consultation with a lactation specialist should be considered. Because hospital discharge of normal
  newborns occurs before the milk supply is established and before jaundice peaks, a follow up visit 2 days
  after discharge is recommended by the AAP to evaluate adequacy of intake and degree of jaundice.a
               BREASTFEEDING AND JAUNDICE




B. BREAST-MILK JAUNDICE

 Unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia lasting until 2–3 months of age is
  common in breastfed infants.
 Moderate unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia for 6– 12 weeks in a thriving
  breastfed infant without evidence of hemolysis, hypothyroidism, or other
  disease strongly suggests this diagnosis.
                                     BILIRUBIN TOXICITY


 Unconjugated bilirubin anion is the agent that causes bilirubin neurotoxicity. It is unknown whether there is a fixed
  level of bilirubin above which brain damage always occurs.

 The blood brain barrier has a role in protecting the infant from brain damage, but its integrity is impossible to
  measure clinically. Albumin binds unconjugated bilirubin, which is protective against bilirubin neurotoxicity.

 The amount of albumin available to bind the unconjugated bilirubin anion and the presence of other anions that may
  displace bilirubin from albumin binding sites are important factors to consider.

 The risk of bilirubin encephalopathy is small in healthy, term neonates even at bilirubin levels of 25–30 mg/dL (430–
  516 mmol/L).

 Risk depends on the duration of hyperbilirubinemia, the concentration of serum albumin, associated illness, acidosis,
  and the concentrations of anions such as sulfamethoxazole and ceftriaxone that compete for albumin binding site.
 4. Acute Bilirubin Encephalopathy
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS & TYPICAL FEATURES
  Lethargy, poor feeding.
  Irritability, highpitched cry.
  Arching of the neck (retrocollis) and trunk (opisthotonos).
  Apnea, seizures, and coma (late).
The term acute bilirubin encephalopathy describes the signs and symptoms of evolving brain injury in the newborn.
Newborn infants with evolving acute bilirubin encephalopathy may be described as “sleepy and not interested in
feeding.” Although these symptoms are nonspecific, they are also the earliest signs of acute bilirubin encephalopathy
and should trigger, in the jaundiced infant, a detailed evaluation of the birth and postnatal history, feeding and
elimination history, an urgent assessment for signs of bilirubininduced neurologic dysfunction (BIND), and a TSB and
albumin measurement. Currently the most sensitive means of assessing neurotoxicity may be the auditory brainstem-
evoked response, which shows predictable, early effects of bilirubin toxicity.
    Chronic Bilirubin Encephalopathy (Kernicterus)
    Extrapyramidal movement disorder (choreoathetoid cerebral palsy).
    Gaze abnormality, especially limitation of upward gaze.
    Auditory disturbances (deafness, failed auditory brainstemevoked
     response with normal evoked otoacoustic emissions, auditory neuropathy,
     auditory dyssynchrony).
    Dysplasia of the enamel of the deciduous teeth.
Kernicterus is an irreversible brain injury characterized by choreoathetoid cerebral palsy and hearing
impairment. The diagnosis is clinical, but magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scanning of the brain is
nearly diagnostic if it shows abnormalities isolated to the globus pallidus, the subthalamic nuclei, or both.
The risk factors of severe hyperbilirubinemia .


• Predischarge TSB or TcB level close to the phototherapy
  threshold Jaundice observed in the first 24 h

• Blood group incompatibility with positive direct Coombs
  test or other known hemolytic disease (eg, G6PD
  deficiency) Gestational age 35–36 wk
• Previous sibling required phototherapy
• Cephalohematoma or significant bruising
• Exclusive breastfeeding, particularly if weight loss is
  excessive
• Jaundice observed before discharge
• Macrosomic infant of a diabetic mother
  G6PD, glucose6phosphate dehydrogenase; TcB, transcutaneous bilirubin; TSB, total serum bilirubin.
                                      EVALUATION




 Feeding and elimination history
 Birth weight and percent weight change since birth
 Examination for sources of excessive heme breakdown
 Assessment of blood type, Coombs testing, complete blood count (CBC) with smear,
  serum albumin, and TSB
 G6PD test if jaundice is otherwise unexplained and in AfricanAmerican infants with
  severe jaundice
 Fractionated bilirubin level in infants who appear ill, those with prolonged jaundice,
  acholic stool, hepatosplenomegaly, or dark urine to evaluate for cholestasis
                TREATMENT OF UNCONJUGATED
                     HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA

A. Phototherapy
 Phototherapy is the most common treatment for unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia. It is
  relatively noninvasive and safe. Intensive phototherapy should decrease TSB by 30%–40% in
  the first 24 hours. The infant’s eyes should be shielded to prevent retinal damage.
 Phototherapy is started electively when the TSB is approximately 6 mg/dL (102 mmol/L) lower
  than the predicted exchange level for that infant. AAP guidelines for phototherapy and
  exchange transfusion in infants of 35 or more weeks’ gestation are available online through
  BiliTool (https://bilitool.org).
 Hyperbilirubinemic infants should be fed by mouth, if possible, to decrease enterohepatic
  bilirubin circulation.
         FIGURE 2




                    Use TSB; do not subtract the direct-reacting or conjugated bilirubin from the total serum
                    bilirubin.




③ Treatment of Hyperbilirubinemia                                                          Ⓐ Providing Phototherapy
          FIGURE 3




                     Use TSB; do not subtract the direct-reacting or conjugated bilirubin from the total serum
                     bilirubin.




③ Treatment of Hyperbilirubinemia                                                         Ⓐ Providing Phototherapy
                  FIGURE 3                      FIGURE 2




Whenever possible, phototherapy should be
provided in the mother’s room or in a room in
which the mother can remain with the infant.



③ Treatment of Hyperbilirubinemia                 Ⓐ Providing Phototherapy
             TREATMENT OF UNCONJUGATED
                  HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA

B. Exchange Transfusion
 Although most infants with unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia can be treated with
  phototherapy, bilirubin levels within 2 mg/dL of the double volume exchange
  threshold require rapid escalation of care.
 Infants should be admitted to a neonatal intensive care unit where exchange
  transfusion can be performed before irreversible neurologic damage occurs.
 Intensive phototherapy should be instituted immediately, during transport to the
  hospital if possible.
                   TREATMENT OF UNCONJUGATED
                        HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA
 Double volume exchange transfusion (~160–200 mL/kg body weight) is most often required in infants
  with extreme hyperbilirubinemia secondary to Rh isoimmunization, ABO incompatibility, or hereditary
  spherocytosis.

 The procedure decreases serum bilirubin acutely by approximately 50% and removes about 80% of
  sensitized or abnormal red blood cells and offending antibody so that ongoing hemolysis is decreased.
 Exchange transfusion is also indicated in any infant with TSB above 30 mg/dL, in infants with signs of
  encephalopathy, or when intensive phototherapy has not lowered TSB by at least 0.5 mg/dL/h after 4
  hours.

 The decision to perform exchange transfusion should be based on TSB, not on the unconjugated
  fraction of bilirubin.
                             COMPLICATION


 Exchange transfusion is invasive, potentially risky, and infrequently performed.
 It should therefore be performed at a referral center. Mortality is 1%– 5% and is
  greatest in the smallest, most immature, and unstable infants.
 Sudden death during the procedure can occur in any infant.
 There is a 5%– 10% risk of serious complications such as necrotizing
  enterocolitis (NEC), infection, electrolyte disturbances, or thrombocytopenia.
