SOURCE: Semester 8\Pedo\Theoritical\PPT\9) Respiratory distress in newborn.pdf

Neonatal Respiratory
     Distress
   Dr Ahmed Abd El Halim

Lecturer of Pediatrics and Neonatology
                 NICU
► A 30-week preterm male infant is delivered via emergency cesarean section due
   to maternal pre-eclampsia.


► At birth, the infant requires resuscitation but stabilizes with oxygen.

► Within 30 minutes, he develops tachypnea (RR 70/min), nasal flaring, intercostal
   retractions, and grunting.

► Oxygen saturation drops to 85% on room air.
► Chest X-ray

► Arterial blood gas
PaO₂ 45 mmHg,
PaCO₂ 60 mmHg,
pH 7.25.




                       (A)   (B)
      It is one of the most important causes of admission in NICUs

            It is one of the most important cause of mortality

                                                 15% of full term
      Normal RR in newborn
                                                29% of late preterm
       40-60 times/ minute
                                              93% of preterm GA<34w

► The newborn respiration differs from the adult in being more rapid, shallower
   and more irregular.
             Preterm infants             01

02     Infants with birth asphyxia
       Infants of diabetic mothers       03

04   Infants born by caesarean section
     Infants born to mothers with fever, prolonged
     rupture of membranes, foul-smelling amniotic    05
                         fluid.



06     Meconium in the amniotic fluid
     Pulmonary causes

01


                        Extra-pulmonary causes
                 02
                             CDH




Bronchopulmonary dysplasia
► Clinically
                     Tachypnea ( rate > 60 / minute)               01

          02    Intercostal, subcostal retractions and chest indrawing

                                   Grunting                        03

                              Nasal flaring                        04

           05           Cyanosis or desaturation in severe cases

                               Decreased air entry                  06

                                   Poor feeding                     07
Respiratory distress syndrome /
 or Hyaline Membrane Disease
            (HMD)
      It is a leading cause of mortality and pulmonary
                 morbidity in preterm infants


                  Slight male predominance.
RDS



      The incidence of RDS is inversely proportional to
                       gestational age:

                    60-80% of <28wk GA
                     15-30% of 32-36wk GA
      During intrauterine life; the alveoli are filled with fetal
       lung fluid. The negative pressure needed for the first
        breaths to open the alveoli is around 25-30 cm water
RDS



      The alveoli do not collapse during expiration because
       of many factors mainly a lipoprotein material called
                           "surfactant"
      Surfactant is secreted by type ll alveolar cells. Its action
      is to decrease the surface tension inside the alveoli, thus
             preventing their collapse during expiration.
RDS

       Surfactant synthesis begins at 24-28 weeks and is
               mature by 35 weeks of gestation
                    RDS is the result of pulmonary immaturity and
                                 surfactant deficiency



               These factors will result in poor pulmonary compliance,
  Etiology     atelectasis, decreased gas exchange and severe hypoxia
Pathogenesis                         and acidosis


                 Alveolar sacs are characteristically lined by eosinophilic
                 hyaline membrane derived from injured epithelial cells
  Etiology
Pathogenesis
RDS
                    The manifestations of "respiratory distress" appear
                           immediately or shortly after birth


                      The course aggravates rapidly with progressive
                   respiratory distress and cyanosis in the first 48 hours.
Clinical picture


                    The condition then stabilizes & finally improves over
                        the next few days with proper management.
                                 X-ray picture shows:
                                  small lung volume
                a fine reticulogranular ground-glass mottling in both
               lung fields through which an air bronchogram is seen
Radiological

    Lab
                       Progressive hypoxemia, high PCO2,
                      mixed respiratory & metabolic acidosis
RDS
                  Intraventricular hemorrhage (fragile subependymal
                           vessels in prematures + hypoxia)



Complications   Patent ductus arteriosus (a high PaO2, is needed to close
                                        the duct)


                  Air leak syndromes (pneumothorax...) are usually the
                         complications of mechanical ventilation

                              Respiratory failure and death
                Prevention of prematurity and other risk factors.




Prevention
                               Antenatal steroids

              Betamethasone or (Dexamethasone) given I.M. to the
             mother 48 hours before delivery of fetus at 34 weeks or
                  less, helps to accelerate fetal lung maturity
               The rationale behind the treatment of HMD is to
            maintain and stabilize the newborn in a good condition
                          until lung maturity occurs


Treatment
                            This can be achieved by:

            1. Supportive care, including Delivery room
               stabilization, thermoregulation, nutritional support,
               fluid and electrolyte management, antibiotic therapy
            2. Surfactant therapy and
            3. Assisted ventilation
Treatment




            Delivery room
Treatment

            Non invasive
            Support
Treatment




            Invasive support
Transient Tachypnea of the
     Newborn: (TTN)
                              Transient Tachypnea of the Newborn




o It is also known as RDS type 2 or wet lung.
o The most common cause of neonatal RD constituting more than 40% of cases
o 11 per 1,000 live births.
o It occurs in term and late preterm neonates
                                   Pathophysiology




o Mild and transient form of RD resulting from delayed clearance of fetal
  lung fluid by lymphatics
                                       Pathophysiology



 Fetal lung Fluid

o Amount: 20 ml/kg near term.
o The presence of lung liquid is important for normal fetal lung development.
o The dominant force mediating lung liquid secretion is the secondary active
   transport of chloride ions from the interstitial space into the lung lumen.
o During labor and delivery, the concentration of adrenaline increases and, as
   a consequence, lung liquid secretion ceases and resorption begins
                       Pathophysiology




Risk factors




o Elective CS.
o Male gender.
o Maternal Diabetes.
                             Clinically



Onset:




o Within 2 hours after delivery with
mild to moderate RD.
o Symptoms can last from
few hours to 3 days.
                                Diagnosis



Chest radiograph




o It shows perihilar streaking with fluid
in interlobar fissures (arrows) (wet lung).

o TTN is a clinical diagnosis
                             Management



Regressive course




o TTN is alleviated by supplemental
oxygen or CPAP and resolves in 3 days.

Most cases need no active treatment.
Meconium Aspiration Syndrome
           (MAS)
          It is a respiratory distress that resulted from the
        aspiration of the meconium, in utero or at delivery.




Meconium is the first stools the newborn passes after birth.

It is a greenish black viscid stuff formed by bile, intestinal
   secretions and epithelial debris present in the fetal gut
       Acute or chronic fetal hypoxia stimulates fetal peristalsis
         and relaxes the anal sphincter leading to passage of
                   meconium in the amniotic fluid.




Also, this hypoxia leads to stimulation of fetal breathing and
hence aspiration of the meconium-containing amniotic fluid.
Not all infants with meconium stained amniotic fluid,
 will have the syndrome, only 4 to 5% of them will
                     develop MAS
Consequences / complications of meconium aspiration



Chemical pneumonitis               Airway obstruction                     Persistent pulmonary
                                                                              hypertension
                              Complete obstruction → atelectasis
  Chemical irritation and
inflammation of the lungs
                              Partial obstruction (Ball valve): leading
                                to air trapping →over inflation and
                              emphysema; with the possibility of air
                                        leak → pneumothorax.
Consequences / complications of meconium aspiration



     Promotion of bacterial growth                     Surfactant
                                                      deactivation


     Meconium, by the way, is sterile, there
     is no infection, but the problem is, that
      it attenuates, the immune response to
                      infection
               Term and post-term infants who suffered from placental
                                   insufficiency
          (manifested as intrauterine growth retardation, fetal distress and
                         meconium-stained amniotic fluid)




      Post maturity               Oligohydramnios
                                                               Chronic respiratory, or
 Maternal hypertension,           maternal diabetes,
                                                              CVS diseases of the mother
pre-eclampsia, eclampsia   maternal heavy cigarette smoking
          01
                                                                          03
                                         02
    Meconium staining of skin, umbilical cord and amniotic fluid.


Respiratory distress with barrel-shaped chest due to over inflation. MAS
  must be considered in any infant, born through meconium-stained
            amniotic fluid, who develops symptoms of RD.


  Some patients are asymptomatic at birth and develop worsening signs of
     RD as the meconium moves into the lower tracheo-bronchial tree
1. Bilateral scattered areas of
     atelectasis, obstructive
 emphysema and pneumonitis.

         2. Air leak
     (pneumomediastinum,
    pneumothorax...) maybe
            present
Symptoms similar to infants with TTN, but the presentation may suggest a
                        more severe condition.


        Infants have greater degrees of RD immediately after delivery.
       Some infants will have an asymptomatic period of several hours
                         before RD become apparent.


       Arterial blood gases will reveal more acidosis, hypercapnia and
                    hypoxemia than in infants with TTN
                     In the delivery room:
   Oral and pharyngeal suction as soon as the head is delivered
                        Oxygen supply

                        In the NICU:
(Oxygen and mechanical ventilation if indicated (by the work of
                breathing and blood gases).

                      Prophylactic antibiotics.
                         Intravenous fluids.
       Treatment of complications (e.g. PPHN, pneumothorax)
Neonatal pneumonia
Neonatal pneumonia

Right upper lobar consolidation
(arrow)
Pulmonary air leak syndromes
 Comprise a spectrum of diseases with the same underlying
pathophysiology as Pneumomediastinum and Pneumothorax.




  Over distension of alveolar sacs or terminal airways leads to
disruption of airway integrity, resulting in dissection of air into
                      surrounding spaces
1. Sudden RD and deterioration of clinical course with alteration of vital
                 signs and worsening of blood gases.

          2. Asymmetry of thorax is present in unilateral cases
Congenital diaphragmatic hernia
              CDH
          1. Severe, immediate respiratory distress,
               2. Scaphoid (sunken) abdomen,
             3. Heart sounds shifted to the right.



It is often diagnosed via prenatal ultrasound (18-20 weeks)
A post term baby born apneic, floppy with deeply stained
meconium, needs intubation in the delivery room. He was
 admitted on mechanical ventilation. The most common
              complication in the NICU is



                     A) Hypoglycemia
        B) Air leak syndrome (e.g., pneumothorax)
        C) Hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy (HIE)
                         D) Sepsis
                 E) Pulmonary hemorrhage
A chest X-ray of a neonate with Respiratory Distress Syndrome
    (RDS) typically displays which characteristic finding?


   A.Bilateral ground-glass mottling and air bronchograms

       B.Large lung volumes with flattened diaphragm

    C.Asymmetrical patchy infiltrates and pleural effusion

            D.Perihilar streaking and wet fissures
Which clinical sign is characteristic of a 'barrel-shaped chest' in a
                             neonate?


                A.Asymmetrical chest movement

               B.Over-inflation due to air trapping

                  C.Severe subcostal retractions

              D.Decreased anteroposterior diameter
Transient tachypnea of the newborn (TTN) is most commonly
                      associated with:


               A) Elective cesarean section
                   B) Vaginal delivery
                     C) Preterm birth
               D) Maternal hypertension
