SOURCE: Semester 8\Pedo\Theoritical\PPT\Lec 2 Child development_.pdf

                                   Child development
Ass.Professor/ Shimaa Anwar Mohamed Anwar
Associate Professor of Paediatrics and Paediatric Neurology – Alexandria
University, MRCPCH, GMC registered UK
Definition
The term is used to describe the skills acquired by children between birth and about 5 years
of age
 during which there are rapid gains in mobility, speech and language, communication and
independence.
During school age, evidence of developmental progression is predominantly through
cognitive development and abstract thinking, although there is also some further maturation
of early developmental skills.
A child’s development represents the interaction of heredity and the environment on the
developing brain.
 Heredity determines the potential of the child Environment influences the extent to which
that potential is achieved.




The main objectives of assessing a young child’s development
   • help the child achieve their maximum potential
   • provide treatment or therapy promptly (particularly important for impairment of hearing
   and vision)
   • act as an entry point for the investigation, care and management of the child with special
   needs.
The four domains or streams of development are, (I) motor development—
   1.   gross motor and fine motor
   2.   speech and language development—expressive and receptive
   3.   social and emotional
   4.   cognitive
Red flag age (limit ages)
   •    is the age by which a developmental milestone should have been achieved.
   •    Failure to meet a red flag age is a prompt for more detailed assessment to determine if
        investigation or intervention is required
chronological age and corrected age
Adjusting for prematurity If a child has been born preterm
the anticipated developmental skills of a 9-month-old baby (chronological age) born 3
months early at 28 weeks’ gestation are more like those of a 6-month-old baby (corrected
age).
Correction is not required after about 2 years
Development in motor adaptive abilities, language and communication, and intellectual
capacity provide a basis for social and emotional development.
Problem solving skills reflects cognitive development, which also includes visual
perceptual and visual motor abilities.


 Development is also described in terms of its progression as either typical or atypical
for the age of the child
The acquisition of developmental skills is a function of interplay between development of
the nervous system and other organ systems, and child’s social and physical
environment and stimuli.
Typical development is characterized by certain basic tenets.
   1. gross motor development progresses in a cephalo-caudal sequence,
   2. fine motor development progresses from midline to lateral sequence,
   3. primary motor patterns or primitive reflexes are integrated into more complex motor
      patterns to allow for later, sequential voluntary motor development,
   4. the rate of attainment of developmental skills between infants vary; however, the
      sequence remains the same
   5. there is progression from generalized reflexive responses to a more specific and
      purposeful response pattern
Impact of developmental delay
   •   A delay or disorder in any one skill area can have an impact on other areas.
   •   For instance, hearing impairment may affect a child’s social, emotional and
       behavioural development as well as speech and language development.
Impact of child abuse
   •   As a child grows, additional skills become important, such as attention and
       concentration, and children need to integrate these skills.
   •   Neglect or child abuse can affect a child at any age but may have particularly
       profound impacts on all developmental domains in young children
   •   Important developmental stages are called developmental milestones.
   •   Developmental milestones Chronological age, physical growth and developmental
       skills usually evolve hand in hand.
Development assessment
• Start with each domain of development separately.
• Ask about the sequence of skills achieved as well as those skills likely to develop in the near
future.
• Determine the level the child has reached for each developmental domain.
• Next relate the progress of each developmental domain to the others.
 Is the child progressing at a similar rate in each domain, or do some developmental domains
lag behind the others?
• Finally relate the child’s developmental achievements to age (chronological or corrected).
standardized screening instrument is recommended as part of the periodic health
maintenance examinations in the primary care setting at 9, 18, 24 or 30 months of age
Although screening is across all streams, certain areas are of specific focus at each visit.
In addition, autism specific screening is recommended at 18- and 24-month visits.
Examples of standardized tools for general developmental screening, general behavioral
screening, language screening, and autism screening are.




Assessment Cognitive function (higher mental function)
   •   can be assessed objectively with formal intelligence quotient (IQ) tests.
   •   However, IQ tests:
   Ø may be affected by cultural background and linguistic skills
   Ø do not test all skill areas
   Ø do not necessarily reflect an individual child’s ultimate outcomes
   Ø may be compromised by specific disabilities, such as cerebral palsy.
Hearing assessment:
   •   Hearing By 25–26 weeks’ gestation, a fetus responds to noises and voice.
   •   At birth, a baby startles to loud sounds, and has a marked preference for voices.
   •   Subsequent development of speech and language requires adequate hearing
   •   Early detection and amelioration of significant hearing impairment improves the
       outcome for speech and language and behaviour, which in turn impacts on educational
       achievement, employment prospects and improves mental health and participation in
       society.
   •   Hearing is improved by using amplification (e.g. hearing aids or cochlear implants),
       and by providing support and advice to parents to help their child develop effective
       communication and enhance learning.
Vision screening
This is performed at:
   •   At birth – for structure of eye and red reflex (cataracts impede a red reflex) – part of
       Newborn Infant Physical Examination (NIPE)
   •   6–8 week check – red reflex for cataracts; fixing and following – part of NIPE
   •   preschool vision screening by orthoptist – checks visual acuity and eye alignment
                                   References
1. Healthy Child Programme: Pregnancy and the first five years of life: Available
    at: https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/healthy-child-programme-
    pregnancy-and-the-first-5-years-of-life
2. NICE guideline 2012: Social and emotional wellbeing: early years. Available
    at: https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ph40
3. Vaccination schedule, UK: Available at:
    https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/the-complete-routine-
    immunisation-schedule
4. Illustrated textbook of pediatrics fifth edition
5. Lipkin PH. Developmental and behavioral surveillance and screening. In:
    Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW. Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics. 21st edition.
    Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2019:159-61.
6. Pellegrino L. Patterns in development and disability. In: Batshaw ML,
    Pellegrino L, Roizen NJ. editors. Children with developmental disabilities. 6th
    edition. Baltimore: Paul H Brookes, 2007:217-28.
7. Accardo PJ, Accardo JA, Capute AJ. A neurodevelopmental perspective on the
    continuum of developmental disabilities. In: Accardo PJ. editor. Capute and
    Accardo’s neurodevelopmental disabilities in infancy and childhood. 3rd
    edition. Baltimore: Paul H Brookes, 2008:3-26.
8. Johnson CP, Myers SM, Council on Children with Disabilities. Identification
    and evaluation of children with autism spectrum disorders. Pediatrics
    2007;120:1183-215.
9. . Shevell M. Global developmental delay and mental retardation or intellectual
    disability: conceptualization, evaluation, and etiology. Pediatr Clin North Am
    2008;55:1071-84, xi.
10. . Shevell M, Ashwal S, Donley D, et al. Practice parameter: evaluation of the
    child with global developmental delay: report of the Quality Standards
    Subcommittee of the American Academy of Neurology and The Practice
    Committee of the Child Neurology Society. Neurology 2003;60:367-80.
11. Brown KA, Parikh S, Patel DR. Understanding basic concepts of
    developmental diagnosis in children. Transl Pediatr 2020;9(Suppl 1):S9-S22.
    doi: 10.21037/tp.2019.11.04
12. Squires J, Potter L, Bricker D. The ASQ users’ guide. 3rd edition. Baltimore:
    Paul H Brooks Publishing, 2009.
13. Rutter M, Bailey A, Lord C. The Social Communication Questionnaire (SCQ)
    manual. Los Angles: Western Psychological Services, 2003.
