SOURCE: Semester 8\Pedo\Theoritical\PPT\Lec 1 Normal development_.pdf

                                          Normal Development



Features of normal child development

    •   A child’s development is an integral part of pediatrics and needs to be considered at every
        consultation.

    •   Child development refers to the sequence of physical, speech and language, cognitive and
        social, behavioral and emotional changes that occur from birth to adulthood.

    •   There are particularly rapid gains in all developmental domains during the first 5 years of life.

    •   In the school years, the evidence of developmental progression is predominantly cognitive and
        the development of abstract thinking

Factors affecting the development

It is an interplay between genetic(nature) and environmental (nurture) factors:

        1. Nature (Genetic / Biological Factors)

                These are inherited or intrinsic influences.

                Examples:

                Genetic syndromes (e.g., Down syndrome)

                Neuromuscular disorders (e.g., Duchenne muscular dystrophy)

                Brain malformations

                Inborn errors of metabolism

                Developmental fields which are Strongly influenced by nature:

                Basic motor maturation sequence

                Some aspects of intelligence

                Clinical clues:

                Dysmorphism, Abnormal tone, Regression,Family history



        2. Nurture (Environmental Factors)

                These are external influences after conception and birth.

                Examples:

                Nutrition

                Parental bonding
                 Language exposure

                 Education

                 Socioeconomic status

                 Emotional security

                 Trauma or neglect

                 Developmental fields which are Strongly influenced by nurture:

                 Language development

                 Social skills

                 Emotional regulation

                 Cognitive stimulation

                 Clinical Clues:

                 Psychosocial deprivation, Lack of stimulation, Malnutrition

       3.   The Modern View: Interaction Model

                 Development is not either/or — it is the interaction between genes and environment.

                 Example:

                 A child with mild genetic learning vulnerability

                 → May function normally with early intervention.

                 This is called gene–environment interaction.



General roles:

   •   four fields of developmental skills

                 •   Gross motor

                 •   Vision and fine motor

                 •   Hearing, speech and language

                 •   Social, emotional and behavioral.

   •   The normal pattern for acquisition of skills:

                 •   Sequentially constant

                 •   Should always be considered longitudinally, relating each stage to what has gone
                     before and what lies ahead
               •   Varies in rate between children

                           u Deficiency in any one skill area can have an
                             impact on other areas

   •   Variation in the pattern of development

   •   There is a wide range of normal developmental skills expected period.

       Median vs. limit age (red flag age)

               •   Median Age

                   The age at which 50% of children have achieved a
                   particular milestone.

                   It represents the average timing.

                   Many normal children will achieve the milestone before or after this age.

               •   Limit Age (Upper Limit of Normal)

                   The age by which ~90–95% of children have achieved the milestone.

                   Failure to achieve the milestone beyond this age is considered delayed.

               •   Example: Walking median age 12 months, but walking limit age is 18 months both
                   are normal. If the child could not walk at age of 19 month, he will need assessment.

   •   Premature infants their age should be corrected to be matched with term infants.

               •   The anticipated developmental skills of a 9-month-old baby (chronological age) born
                   3 months early at 28 weeks’ gestation are more like those of a 6-month-old baby
                   (corrected age).

               •   Correction is not required after age of 2 years .

There are some important points When assessing development:

       u Concentrate on each field of development separately

       u Consider the developmental pattern by thinking Longitudinally.

       u Ask about the sequence of skills achieved as well as those skills likely to develop in the near
         future.

       u Determine the level the child has reached for each skill field

       u Relate the progress of each developmental field to the others.

       u Then relate the child’s developmental achievements to age (chronological or corrected).

           When checking a child’s developmental progress:

               •   Consider the child’s age
               •   Focus your questions on the areas of likely current developmental progress
               •   Offer the child suitable toys to find out about skills through play
               •   Observe how the child uses the toys and interacts with people.
               •   less than 18 months – start with questions on gross motor abilities, acquisition of
                   vision and hearing skills, followed by questions about hand skills
               •   18 months to 2.5 years – start with questions about speech and language and fine
                   motor (hand) skills with only brief questioning about gross motor skills.
               •   2.5 to 4 years – initial questions are best focused around speech and language and
                   social, emotional and behavioural development.
               •   Equipment is aimed at bringing out the child’s skills using play. Cubes, a ball, picture
                   book, doll and miniature toys such as a tea set, crayons and paper allow a quick but
                   useful screen of mobility, hand skills, play and imagination




            Normal developmental milestones

age   milestone Gross Motor              Fine Motor & Language and          Social
                Development              Vision       hearing               Development

6 weeks             Lifts head when      Fixes and       Social smile       Social smile
                    prone                follows

3 months            head control         Hands to        Coo`s
                                         midline

6 months            Sits with support    Palmer grip     Babbling           Recognize
                                         and             (mono-             familiar
                                         Transfers       syllabus)          person and
                                         objects hand                       Stranger
                                         to hand with                       anxiety
                                         mouthing                           begins

8 months            Sits unsupported

9–10 months         Pulls to stand,      Immature        Understands        Separation
                    crawling             Pincer grasp    “no”               anxiety
                                         developing      Polysyllabic
                                                         babbling           Can play
                                                                            peekaboo
12 months           Walks with one       Mature          1–2 meaningful     Waves bye-
                    hand held / may      pincer grasp    words              bye
                    walk alone
                                         Drink from a
                                         cup by two
                                         hand
 18 months          Walks                Scribbles       10–20 words      Feeds self
                    independently,       Can feed                         Play symbolic
                    runs stiffly         with spoon                       play

 2 years            Runs well,           Builds tower    2-word           Parallel play
                    climbs stairs two    6 cubes         sentences
                    feet per step        Make circles

 3 years            Rides tricycle,      Copies circle   3–4 word         Cooperative
                    stairs alternating                   sentences        play begins
                    feet

 4 years            Hops on one          Copies cross    Full sentences, Group play
                    foot                                 understandable
                                                         speech

 5 years            Skips                Copies          Fluent speech    Imaginary
                                         square                           play



Developmental Red Flags

u General Red Flags (Any Age)
  • Loss of previously acquired skills (regression)
  • Persistent hypotonia or hypertonia
  • Asymmetry of movement (early hand preference <1.5 year)
  • Poor eye contact
  • No response to sound
  • Persistent feeding difficulties
  • Parental concern (always important)
u Age-Specific Red Flags
  • If a child exceeded the limit age and did not achieve the milestone
u Red Flags Suggesting Specific Disorders
  • Possible Cerebral Palsy

Early hand preference (<18 months)

Scissoring posture

Persistent primitive reflexes

    •   Possible Autism Spectrum Disorder

No response to name by 12 months

No pointing by 18 months

No joint attention

No pretend play

Poor eye contact



    •   Possible Neuromuscular Disorder

Severe hypotonia

Delayed motor milestones with preserved social skills

Gowers’ sign (after 3–4 years)
Formal developmental screening and assessment

u Developmental screening – checks of whole populations or groups of children at set ages by
  trained professionals.

   •   The Ages and Stages Questionnaire (ASQ)

           A standardized questionnaire by use 19 age-specific developmental questions starting at 4
           months and ending at 60 months of age. It has high specificity

Developmental assessment is a more detailed analysis of development that follows concern at
screening that a child’s developmental progress may be delayed or disordered in some way.

           u It is part of the diagnostic process and includes investigation, therapy and advice on how
             to optimize the child’s progress.

           u It is performed by a specialist service.

           u Griffiths and Bailey Infant Development Scales are important scales for developmental
             assessment.

           u standardized tests concentrating on assessing specific aspects of development, e.g. the
             Reynell Language Scale, the Gross Motor Function Measure, the Autism Diagnostic
             Interview and the Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule

           u Cognitive function (higher mental function) can be assessed objectively with formal
             intelligence quotient (IQ) tests.

Developmental problems and the child with special needs

   u Delay is used only in the 0–5 age group and describes slow acquisition of skills but in the correct
     order. It may be

       •   GLOBAL (affecting two or more skill areas)
       •   or SPECIFIC (affecting only one skill area).

   u Learning/intellectual disability – describes school aged children with significantly reduced ability
     to understand new or complex information, learn new skills, and to cope independently with
     everyday life, impacting most areas of the person’s life.
Reference

Illustrated textbook of pediatrics

Lissauer T, Carroll W. Normal child development, hearing and vision. In: Lissauer T, Carroll W, editors.
Illustrated Textbook of Paediatrics. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2018. p. 27–43.
