SOURCE: Semester 8\Pedo\Theoritical\PPT\Vitamin deficiency  Rickets.pdf

        Chapter 3: Nutritional Disorders                                                              31




                             SPECIFIC VITAMIN DEFICIENCIES

                                              VITAMIN D
Vitamin D is not really a vitamin. It is a prohormone closely related to classical steroids.
Vitamin D metabolism:
•       Vitamin D is a fat-soluble vitamin present in 2 natural forms:
         1. Vitamin D3 (Cholecalciferol) formed in the skin by ultraviolet irradiation of 7-dehydro-
            cholesterol. It is also present in cod liver oil, butter, liver, and egg yolk. Breast milk
            content of vitamin D is low (contains only ±30 IU of vitamin D / liter) and cow's milk
            content is even lower. Breast milk vitamin D probably is adequate if the lactating mother
            and infant are exposed sufficiently to sun light.
         2. Vitamin D2 is formed by ultraviolet irradiation of ergosterol in green plants.
The daily requirement of vitamin D for infants is 400 IU (or 10 μg). If not sufficiently exposed to sun
light, babies fed on breast milk or unmodified cow's milk will usually need supplementary vitamin D.
Most commercial milk formulas and baby foods are fortified with vit. D but still insufficient for daily
needs.
•       Vitamin D activation :
            •    Vitamin D3 and D2 are biologically inactive forms (pro-hormones).
            •    They are transported to the liver to be hydroxylated to 25 hydroxy-vit.D (Calcidiol).
            •    They are then further hydroxylated in the proximal renal tubules to 1,25 dihydroxy-vit D
                (Calcitriol) which is the biologically active form.




    •     Physiological actions of Calcitriol (1,25 hydroxy-vit.D):
            •  GIT: promotes calcium (Ca) and phosphorus (P) absorption in the small intestine.
            •  Kidney: increases Ca and P reabsorption.
            •  Bones and teeth: It affects Ca and P resorption from old bones and deposition in newly
              formed bone and teeth through its regulatory effect on the level of serum alkaline
              phosphatase enzyme.
            • Immune system: helps differentiation of immune cells helps to prevent infection.
            • Non skeletal action: immune cells, brain, pancreas, breast.


            VITAMIN D DEFICINCY AND INFANTILE RICKETS
Definition:
It is a metabolic disorder of infancy and childhood caused by vitamin D deficiency and affecting:
         • Growing bones: defective mineralization of osteoid tissue and slow growth.
         • Skeletal muscles and ligaments: rickety myopathy (hypotonia) and laxity of ligaments.
NB: Rickets is the disease of infancy (growing bones) i.e. till the age of 2 years.
32                                                           Madkour's Essentials of Pediatrics

Causes of infantile rickets:
I- Vitamin D deficiency: defective supply / synthesis (commonest):

         1. Lack of exposure to sun rays to the infant or pregnant mothers’.
                • Race: black race is more susceptible due to dark skin interfering with ultraviolet
                    rays.
                • Environmental factors: clouds, smoke, dust and ordinary window glass prevent
                    ultraviolet rays from reaching babies’ skin. Thus, rickets is more common in
                    winter, in big smoky towns, and in children always kept in-door.
         2. Relative deficiency (increased need):
             Rapidly growing infants: prematures, twins and infants recovering from malnutrition.
                 NB: Marasmic infants and cretins rarely develop rickets due to arrested growth
                     (atrophic rickets).
         3. Deficiency of vitamin D storage from pregnant mother (congenital rickets).
              Risk factors: a. Low maternal nutrition of vit. D during pregnancy.
                             b. Low sun exposure during pregnancy.
                             c. Closely spaced pregnancy.
              Clinical picture: early rickets and early tetany and convulsions
II- Defective activation of vitamin D to calcitriol (1,25 Hydroxy-D):
        1. Liver diseases defective 25-hydroxylation of vit D.
        2. Chronic renal diseases (renal osteodystrophy) defective 1, 25 hydroxylation of vit. D.
        3. Deficiency of 1-hydroxylase enzyme inadequate renal production of 1,25 hydroxy vit.D
           (Vit. D dependent rickets type I) (rare).
        4. Anticonvulsant therapy: phenytoin and phenobarbital interfere with normal activation of
           vitamin D abnormal vit D metabolites.
III- Defective Vitamin D absorption:
        1) Malabsorption syndromes, celiac disease, chronic diarrhea, etc.
        2) Rachitogenic diets like:
           - Yoghurt and unmodified cow’s milk (its high P content decreases the absorption of Ca)
           - Cereals (high phytic acid content which forms insoluble salts with calcium).
IV- End-organ resistance to calcitriol in bones:Vitamin D dependent rickets type II (rare).
Pathogenesis of infantile rickets:
                                       VITAMIN D DEFICIENCY
                                                   ¯
                                   ¯ Intestinal absorption of Ca & P
                                               ¯
                                 ¯ Ca level in blood & ECF
                                               ¯
                         Stimulation of Parathyroid gland ® ­PTH
                        ¯                                         ¯
        BONES: ­ mobilization of Ca                       KIDNEYS: ¯ reabsorption of P
                    ¯                                                             ¯
       Normal Serum Ca level (9 mg/dl)           ¯ Serum P level (<3mg/dl) Phosphaturia
                               ¯                            ¯
                            Low Ca X P solubility product (< 30)
                                               ¯
                          Failure of calcification of osteoid tissue
Pathology of infantile rickets:
Failure of calcification of the osteoid tissue around the osteoblasts of growing bone will lead to:
    Chapter 3: Nutritional Disorders                                                                  33


•  At the end of long bones osteoblasts will continue forming excess osteoid tissue which fails to
 calcify or is poorly calcified. Consequently, a wide, irregular zone of non rigid tissue is produced at
 the bone-cartilage junction present at the metaphysis. This uncalcified osteoid tissue is easily
 compressible and is responsible for the skeletal abnormalities seen in rickets (widening of ends of
 long bones, rachitic rosary, etc.) as well as the X-ray findings (broadening, cupping and fraying of
 epiphyseal line).
• In the shaft of long bones, the pre-formed bone is resorbed and is replaced by excess uncalcified
 osteoid tissue, formed from the periosteum, in the form of a shell which surrounds the shaft over its
 entire length. In X-rays, this will appear as rarefaction of cortical bone, periosteal elevation
 deformities and sometimes, green stick fractures.

                    Pathological changes in rickets appear in the following order:
                          First: Biochemical changes: ALP and inorganic phosphate
                          Then: Radiological changes: seen in X-ray wrist region
                         Lastly: Clinical features: Craniotabes, rickety rosary etc.

Clinical picture of rickets:
•  Bony changes of infantile rickets appear after several months of vitamin D deficiency.
•  They usually appear in the second half of 1st year and during 2nd year of age.
•  They may appear earlier (e.g. 2nd month) in breast-fed infants of vitamin D deficient mothers (as
  defective sun exposure during pregnancy).
• It is rare to find active rickets in late childhood.
Early manifestations (less than 6th month):
    1.
     Increased sweating, particularly around the head.
    2.
     Irritability by day.
    3.
     Insomnia.
    4.
     Craniotabes (thinning of outer table of skull) is the earliest bony change. Detected by firmly
    and gently pressing over the occiput or posterior part of parietal bone away from sutures. A
    ping- pong ball sensation will be felt (it is preferable not to try to detect it). It must be
    differentiated from craniotabes caused by prematurity, osteogenesis imperfecta and
    hydrocephalus where the softening is generalized or along the sutures.
5. Rachitic rosaries and Harrison sulcus (see later).
Other manifestations later on:
Symptoms:
         •   Delayed sitting, standing, walking (due to hypotonia).
         •   Delayed teeth eruption.
Signs:
                                          I. Bony changes:
Changes in the skeleton are greatest at the sites where growth is most rapid and the deformities are the
result of gravity and traction of muscles on the affected bones.
1- Head:
    i. Craniotabes: usually disappears before the end of 1st year.
    ii. Anterior fontanel is wider and its closure is delayed than normal.
    iii. Frontal and parietal bossings are due to deposits of osteoid tissue which is situated mainly
         around the centers of ossification of these bones.
    i. The head is larger than normal and may remain so throughout life (DD. Large head). The
         Shape: frontal and parietal bossings and the grooves between the bosses may result in square
         skull (caput quadratum). The skull may be permanently asymmetric.
    i. Deciduous teeth: delayed eruption, enamel defect and sometimes extensive caries.

2- Thorax:
34                                                            Madkour's Essentials of Pediatrics

  i. Rickety (or rachitic) rosary: prominent enlargement of the costochondral junctions seen and
     felt as a row of beads about the size of cherries extending down and backwards along the line of
      costochondral junction.
 ii. Pigeon breast deformity: -Longitudinal grooves develop posterior to the rosary.
                                    -Flattening of sides of chest cage.
                                    -Sternum and its adjacent cartilages are projected forward.
 iii. Harrison's sulcus: horizontal groove corresponding to the line of attachment of the diaphragm
       with flaring of the costal margins below. It is due to inward pull by the diaphragm on the soft rib
       cage.
3- Extremities:




     Knock-knees(genu                      Normal variants of legs                    Bowlegs (genu varum)
         valgum)

 i. Epiphyseal enlargement is common and is best felt at the wrists and ankles (Marfan sign).
 ii. Deformities: bending of the soft shafts of weight bearing long bones may results in:
          • Bowlegs or knock-knees due to deformed tibia and fibula if infant has started to walk.
          • Femur and tibia may also acquire an anterior convexity.
          • The humerus, radius and ulna may be bent as the infant crawls.
iii. Rickety dwarfism occurs if there are deformities of Legs + Spine + Pelvis together.
iv. Greenstick fractures of long bones occur often with no clinical symptoms. The bones, being soft,
     are not broken completely, but only partially. In other words, it is a fracture of the soft bony cortex
     within the intact periosteum. There is no pain or swelling. The fracture is detectable only in X-ray.
4- Spinal Column : changes are mostly due to laxity of ligaments and hypotonia of muscles, so it is
not a bony fixed deformity.
1. Scoliosis (mild to moderate lateral curvature of spine) is common.
2. Kyphosis of dorsolumbar region when sitting.
3. Lordosis of lumbar region is exaggerated in erect posture.
5- Pelvis: deformity of pelvis occurs commonly in children with lordosis.
1. Size: smaller due to retarded growth.
2. Narrowed pelvic entrance due to shortened anteroposterior diameter.
3. Narrowed pelvic outlet due to forward displacement of sacrum.
In females, if these deformities are permanent, they may interfere with normal delivery later on when
they become pregnant.

                                   II. Ligaments and Muscles
  Motor delay secondary to myopathy, hypotonia, poor muscle development and laxity of ligaments
  leading to:
• Delayed sitting, standing and walking, but other milestones as language and social are normal.
• Extremities and spinal deformity and acrobatic rickets: flaccidity of whole body and hyper-
  extensibility of joints.
• Pot belly due to hypotonia of abdominal wall, gastric and intestinal muscles and downward
  displacement of liver and spleen (ptosis) by the deformed thoracic cage
Investigations:
1-Radiological findings:
      Chapter 3: Nutritional Disorders                                                                  35


Active Rickets: A radiograph of wrist is best for early diagnosis, and shows:
    1. Broadening + cupping (concave) + fraying
       (irregularity) of the lower ends of radius and ulna.
    2. Increased distance between the calcified ends of radius
       and ulna and the carpal or metacarpal bones (the large
       non calcified epiphyseal end of shaft will not appear in
       the X-rays).
    3. Epiphyseal line is indistinct.
    4. Shafts: bone density and prominent trabeculae.
    5. Periosteal elevation may be seen.
    6. Fractures of greenstick type, or deformities.

2- Biochemical (laboratory) findings :
•   Serum calcium: usually normal due to compensatory hyperparathyroidism
   (normal level = 9 -11 mg/ dl).
• Serum phosphate: Low (< 3 mg /dl) due to compensatory hyperparathyroidism
   (normal = 4.56.5 mg/dl).
• Calcium X Phosphate solubility product is low < 30 (normal is > 40).
• Serum alkaline phosphatase activity is high (normal 515 Bodansky Unit /dl, or 145-200
IU/liter).
Healing Rickets:
After starting treatment, evidence of healing may take 2-3 weeks to appear in X-rays.
 1. Line of preparatory calcification: it is an irregular band of calcification separated from ends of long
    bones by the uncalcified metaphysial zone of osteoid tissue.
2. As healing progresses, the osteoid tissue between this line and end of long bones becomes
    calcified and the shaft grows toward the line of preparatory calcification until it becomes united
    with it.
Complications of infantile rickets :
1. Neurological: hypocalcemic tetany.
2. Respiratory: chest deformities may produce atelectasis and expose rachitic children to recurrent
   chest infections like bronchitis and bronchopneumonia.
3. Skeletal: fractures and severe bony deformities (particularly pelvis in females).
Differential diagnosis of rickets: Differentiate from other causes of:
   1. Delayed motor development (as in cerebral palsy and global developmental delay cases)
   2. Large head.
   3. Head bosses: scurvy, syphilis, achondroplasia.
   4. Deformities and fractures: physiologic bow legs (no lab or X-ray features of rickets, resolves
      spontaneously in a few years), chondrodysplasia, osteogenesis imperfecta.
Prevention of infantile rickets :
•     Exposure of both infant, pregnant and lactating mother to ultraviolet rays (direct sun-light, clear
      sky, around noon).
•     Supplying the daily requirements of vitamin D orally (syrup or drops) preferably in water
      miscible vehicle:
      - For breast-fed infants 400 IU (or 10 g) of vitamin D/ day, starting from birth.
      - For prematures, twins and infants of mothers with osteomalacia: 1000 IU/day, starting after
         birth.
      - Vitamin D should also be given to the pregnant and lactating mother.
Treatment of rickets:
36                                                              Madkour's Essentials of Pediatrics

•  A daily oral dose of (4000 - 6000 IU) (50-150 μg) will produce healing in 2 to 4 weeks
  demonstrable in Xray. Alternatively, we can treat with a single huge dose (600,000 IU or 15,000
  μg) orally or intramuscularly.
• After healing is complete, reduce the dose to 400 IU/day (or 10 μg/day).
• We have to be sure that the infants and children are receiving adequate calcium and phosphorus.
HYPOCALCEMIA AND HYPOCALCEMIC TETANY
Tetany is caused by increased activity of the motor nerve fibers and muscles due to a decrease in free
ionized calcium.
Plasma calcium (normal total plasma calcium) = 9-11 mg/dL is present in 2 forms:
• Diffusible Ca = 5.5 mg/dL: Ionized Ca= 5 mg/dL (affected by plasma pH).
                                Non-ionized Ca = 0.5 mg/dL.
• Protein-bound Ca = 4.5 mg/dL (its amount is affected by the level of plasma proteins).
Etiology of Hypocalcemia (after the Neonatal period):
     1. Infantile tetany (commonest): it is a complication of infantile rickets and is usually precipitated
        by febrile illness (infection) failure of parathyroid compensatory mechanism or spontaneous
        exhaustion of parathyroid gland.
     2. Hypoparathyroidism.
     3. Alkalosis (metabolic or respiratory). In the presence of a high pH (alkalemia), the ionized
        calcium concentration decreases as a result of increased binding of calcium to albumin.
        Decreased ionized calcium concentration may cause tetany. Alkalosis may occur in:
            • Excessive vomiting (due to single gastric cause e.g cong.pyloric stenosis)         loss of
                hydrochloric acid        alkalosis     pH      ionized calcium.
            • Excess administration of alkalies e.g. citrates, bicarbonates or phosphates alkalosis.
            • Hyperventilation of lungs alkalosis, e.g. in some cases of encephalitis.
            • Postacidotic tetany: due to rapid and over correction of acidosis with bicarbonate (as in
                severe dehydration and acidosis in acute diarrhea).
     4. Hypomagnesemia (magnesium is necessary for PTH formation and action).
Clinical picture:
I. Latent tetany: occurs if serum Ca is between 7 - 9 mg/dl.
All the manifestations under this group are due to hyperirritability of the nerves.
    1. Chvostek's sign: when you lightly tap the facial nerve anterior to the ear, the facial muscles
       supplied by it will twitch briefly with each tap.
    2. Trousseau's sign: inflation of the sphygmomanometer cuff applied on the arm to above the
       systolic pressure provokes a carpal spasm within 4 minutes.
    3. Erb's sign: applying a current less than 5 milliamperes causes contraction of muscles.
       Normally, a more powerful current is needed.
    4. Peroneal sign: when you tap the peroneal nerve on the neck of fibula, the muscles it supplies
       contract, and the foot is everted.
II. Manifest tetany: occurs if serum Ca is less than 7 mg/dl, in the following forms:
    1. Carpal and pedal spasms that may occur instantaneously or after an attack of fever. In carpal
       spasm, there is extension of interphalangeal joints, flexion of metacarpo-phalangeal joints and
       adduction of thumb and flexion of wrist (Obstetrician hand or Main d’Accoucheur). In pedal
       spasm the feet are extended and adducted and the toes are plantar flexed.
    2. Laryngeal spasm: crouping or whooping sound, maximal occurrence is between 6 to 15
       months.
    3. Generalized convulsions are common in infants and older children.
Diagnosis :
     •   Clinical picture of tetany + clinical picture of etiological factor (Rickets).
     •   Laboratory findings: low serum calcium.
     •   Radiographic study if rickets is suspected as a cause.
                      Cases of convulsions or laryngeal spasm must be thoroughly
                          Investigated before diagnosing tetany as an etiology.
    Chapter 3: Nutritional Disorders                                                              37




Management:
1. Emergency:
        • Intravenous Calcium gluconate (5-10 ml of 10% solution) slowly over 10 minutes.
        • Acute seizure treatment: IV diazepam 0.3 mg/kg/dose.
        • Oxygen inhalation for laryngeal stridor.
2. Maintenance: - Oral Ca gluconate or Ca lactate 200-500 mg/kg/day, divided.
                  - Oral vitamin D: 4000 U/day in cases due to rickets.
3. Investigate the etiological factor and treat the underlying cause.
Treat the precipitating condition, e.g. acute infection.

                               HYPERVITAMINOSIS D
Hypervitaminosis D is usually iatrogenic due to huge or repeated doses of vitamin D.
Manifestations : all are attributed to hypercalcemia, and appear 1-3 months after intake of large
doses of vitamin D.
    1. Anorexia, irritability.                         Complications:
    2. Vomiting with no apparent cause.                    •   Nephrocalcinosis
    3. Constipation with hard stool pellets.               •   Renal failure.
    4. Excess thirst and polyuria
    5. Evidence of dehydration.                        Investigations: increased serum calcium
    6. Hypotonia .                                     ultrasound or X ray abdomen: nephrocalcinosis
Treatment :
   1. Stop administration of vitamin D and calcium.
   2. Fluids for correction of dehydration.
   3. Rachitogenic diet (poor in milk and rich in carbohydrates and cereals).
   4. In severe cases (serum Ca > 12 mg/dl): Prednisone 2 mg/kg/day until serum Ca drops to 12.
5. Oral aluminium hydroxide also may be used.
                               VITAMIN A DEFICIENCY
Vitamin A is a fat-soluble vitamin. It exerts important functions in the body:
       1. Formation of the visual pigment (essential for vision in dim light and color vision).
       2. It maintains the integrity of the epithelial surfaces.
       3. Formation of mucopolysaccharides in the matrix of bones and teeth.
       4. It is essential for growth.
Sources:
1. Animal fats, milk and milk products, egg yolk, liver, especially cod liver oil.
2. Yellow and green fruits and vegetables (e.g. carrots rich in carotene).
Daily requirements : 4000 IU (15005000 IU) vit. A (or 150-500 g retinol equivalents).
Causes of vit. A deficiency:
   1.   Deficient intake e.g. vegetarian diet.
   2.   Impaired absorption e.g. celiac disease, cholestatic jaundice, etc.
   3.   Deficient storage as in liver cirrhosis.
   4.   Hypoproteinemia (albumin is a carrier for vitamin A) e.g. in kwashiorkor.
Manifestations of vit A deficiency:
1. Eye manifestations:
        •   Night blindness.
        •   Xerophthalmia (dryness of conjunctiva).
38                                                          Madkour's Essentials of Pediatrics

        •   Keratomalacia (softening of the cornea).
        •   Corneal ulcerations, necrosis and permanent corneal scar.
        •   Bitot spots (dry white plaques on the bulbar conjunctiva).
2. Skin and mucous membranes:
        •    Xerosis of skin: the skin is dry, scaly and rough.
        •    Follicular hyperkeratosis over buttocks and extensor surface of arms and legs (toad skin).
        •    Recurrent respiratory and urinary infections, due to epithelial cell metaplasia and low
            immune response.
3. Skeletal system
        •   Faulty epiphyseal bone formation.
        •   Retardation of growth.
                       Vit. A deficiency is usually associated with
            * Increased susceptibility to infection      * Increased mortality

Prophylaxis: Both World Health Organization and Ministry of Health recommend giving:
A- For normal children:
    • 1st dose: 100,000 IU orally at age of 9 months.
    • 2nd dose: 200,000 IU orally at age of 18 months (at the time of booster OPV and DPT).
B- For children at high risk of complications of vit.A deficiency:
  In cases of severe malnutrition, persistent diarrhea, respiratory infections, measles:
        • For infants < 6 months:         single oral dose of 50,000 IU.
        • For infants 6-12 months:        single oral dose of 100, 000 IU.
        • For children > 12 months: single oral dose of 200,000 IU.
C- For lactating mothers: single oral dose of 200,000 IU within 8 weeks of delivery.
Treatment of vitamin A deficiency: WHO and Ministry of Health recommend:
        •   For infants < 6 months:   single oral dose of 50,000 IU.
        •   For infants 6-12 months:  single oral dose of 100, 000 IU.
        •   For children > 12 months: single oral dose of 200,000 IU.
•    Alternatively we can give oral vitamin A 5000 - 10,000 IU / day for 2 weeks.
•    In malabsorption: oral vitamin A, 10,000 - 25,000 IU / day.

                            Fat soluble vitamines:
                                             E–D–A–K
                            Water soluble vitamines:
                                   B1 – B2 – B3 – B6 – B12 – Folate - C
    Chapter 3: Nutritional Disorders                                                                                                                                        39


    VITAMIN                    FUNCTION                               EFFECT OF DEFICIENCY                                     SOURCE                      TREATMENT
                                                                                                                                                             (Daily dose)
B1 (Thiamine)       Co-enzyme in decarboxylation of        Beri-beri:                                             Liver, meat, milk.                      5-25 mg orally
                    pyruvic acid acetyl CoA                -Polyneuropathy,Tender calfs, Areflexia,               Cereals, nuts, legumes
                                                           -Ophthalmoplegia      -Heart failure, Edema            N.B.: Rice is very poor in thiamin
B2 (Riboflavin)     Co-enzyme in oxidation-reduction       Anorexia, No weight gain, Anemia                       Liver, meat, milk, cheese, eggs,        5-25 mg orally
                    (FAD Co-enzyme)                        Angular stomatitis, Cheilosis, Glossitis, Mucositis,   whole grain, green leafy vegetables
                                                           Nasolabial seborrhea,
                                                           Photophobia, Corneal vascularization
B3 (Niacin)         Co-enzyme in oxidation-reduction       Pellagra:                                              Liver, meat, fish                       25-50 mg orally
                    (NAD Co-enzyme)                        Photosensitivity                                       Whole grain, green leafy vegetables
                                                           Dermatitis and rough skin over exposed parts           N.B:Tryptophan is niacin precursor
                                                           Dementia, Diarrhea, Death.                             N.B.: Corn is very poor in niacin
B6 (Pyridoxine)     Co-factor in amino acid metabolism     Vomiting, Diarrhea, Seborrhea, Scaly dermatitis        Liver, meat                             5-25 mg orally
                                                           Microcytic hypochromic anemia                          Whole grain, peanuts, Soya beans        For dependency:
                                                           Seizures, Peripheral neuropathy, Hyperacusis           N.B.: children on INH therapy need      10-250 mg orally
                                                           Vit B6 dependency: no response to usual doses of B6    supplementation with vit B6
B10 (Folic acid)    DNA synthesis                          Megaloblastic anemia                                   Liver, cheese, cereals,                 1 mg orally
                                                                                                                  green vegetables
B12                 DNA synthesis,                         Megaloblastic anemia, Vitiligo,                        Meat, fish, cheese,                     50-100 g, IM,
(Cyanocobalamine)   Co-enzyme in folate metabolism         Peripheral neuropathy, Spinal posterior & lateral                                              monthly
                                                           column disease
Biotin              Co-factor in amino acid metabolism     Anorexia, Nausea, Pallor,                              Meat, yeast, eggs                       0.15 - 0.3 mg orally
                    (Carboxylase reactions)                Dermatitis, Alopecia, Glossitis                        (normally, it is synthesized by
                                                           Mental changes, Hypotonia, Death                        intestinal flora)
C (ascorbic acid)   Reducing agent                         Scurvy :                                               Citrus fruits, green vegetables         250-500 mg orally
                    Collagen metabolism (cartilage, bone   Irritability, Purpura, Bleeding gums,                  ( Destroyed by cooking )
                    matrix, connective tissue of blood     Periosteal hemorrhages, Bone aches,
                    vessels)                               Pseudoparalysis with frog position of extremities
E (α-tocopherol)    Antioxidant                            Hemolysis in preterm infants, ataxia, areflexia        Seeds, germ oils, green leafy veget.    1 - 3 IU orally
K                   Carboxylation of clotting factors      Hemorrhagic disease of newborn, prothrombin time       Liver, green veget., intestinal flora   1 mg IM (once)
                                                           Vitamins B complex, C, E and K
40   Madkour's Essentials of Pediatrics
