SOURCE: Semester 8\Neuro\Theoritical\PPT\L10) Stroke.pdf

      Bildergebnis für University of Alexandria




Cerebrovascular Stroke
Dr. Ahmed Elhfnawy (Email: Ahmedmelhfnawy@gmx.de)
A. Prof. of Neurology, University of Alexandria
Consultant of Neurology, Werra Meißner Hospital, Germany
                          Background

►Most common cause of adult disability, stroke is sometimes more
 worse than death!
►Fourth most common cause of mortality worldwide
►Ischemic stroke represents 85% of all strokes
►Hemorrhagic stroke represents 15% of all strokes
►The incidence is higher in men
►The prevalence is higher in women because women survive longer
 than men



                                                University of Alexandria
            Stroke throughout the history

►Stroke was described in a document found in the
 tomb of the vizier Weshptah related to the 5 dynasty
                                             th

 (2455 B.C.) in ancient Egypt.
►As early as the 4 century BC, animal models of
                   th

 stroke were designed by the Alexandrian anatomists
 Erasistratus and Herophilus (Zargaran et al., Int J
 Cardiol 2013).


                                       University of Alexandria
            Stroke throughout the history

►In his Canon of
 Medicine, Ibn
 Sina (980–1032
 A.D.) described
 stroke.
                                  Canon of Medicine
                                       (Source:
                   http://ddc.aub.edu.lb/projects/saab/avicenna/64
                                 0/html/S1_323.html)                              Ibn Sina
                                                                        (source: Golzari et al.,
                                                                        Anasth Analg 2013)




                                                                 University of Alexandria
    Bildergebnis für University of Alexandria




Ischemic Cerebrovascular Stroke
                           Case
►82-year-old female patient.
►7:45 am: Weakness and numbness of the right hand (she
 drops things out of the hand), called her son and could not
 speak.
►08:00 am: The son reached to her, she could speak
 normally.
►09:00 am: Hand weakness and numbness disappeared.
►Past medical history: hypertension
►Examination: normal

                                              University of Alexandria
                                                  University Hospital of Alexandria
40% stenosis in the left internal
        carotid artery


                University of Alexandria
►Transient Aphasia associated with
 sensorimotor hand weakness on the right side,
 which lasted for ~ 75 minutes
►MRI showed brain infarctions
►Q: Stroke ot TIA?



                                   University of Alexandria
 Definition of ischemic stroke and TIA
  Acute onset focal neurological
             deficit
   WHO (1970)                AHA/ASA (2009)
                                                 No evidence of
                             Evidence of brain
                                                 brain infarction
                               infarction on
>24h → Stroke   <24h → TIA    neuroimmaging
                                                        on
                                                 neuroimmaging
                                 → Stroke
                                                      → TIA


 30-50% of patients having the old TIA
definition→ evidence of brain infarction
  on MRI (Easton et al., Stroke 2009).
                                  University of Alexandria
            Risk factors of ischemic stroke

►Non-modifiable: old age, male sex, genetics, race
 (stroke is more common among blacks)

►Modifiable: hypertension, diabetes mellitus,
 dyslipidemia, smoking, sedentary life, bad dietary
 habits and high salt intake, obesity, stress.



                                         University of Alexandria
Cardiovascular Events during World Cup Soccer
                               The FIFA World Cup 2006 in
                               Germany started on June 9, 2006,
                               and ended on July 9, 2006. The
                               2006 World Cup matches with
                               German participation are indicated
                               by numbers 1 through 7: match 1,
                               Germany versus Costa Rica;
                               match 2, Germany versus Poland;
                               match 3, Germany versus Ecuador;
                               match 4, Germany versus Sweden;
                               match 5, Germany versus
                               Argentina; match 6, Germany
                               versus Italy; and match 7,
                               Germany versus Portugal (for third-
                               place standing). Match 8 was the
                               final match, Italy versus France.

                           Wilpert-Lampen, N Engl J med, 2008
                                      University of Alexandria
Anatomy




          University of Alexandria
        Etiology of ischemic stroke (TOAST classification)
Stroke subtypes                             Features
Cardioembolic disease ~30%                  A major cardioembolic source must be detected e.g., atrial fibrillation, mechanical
                                            prosthetic valve, rheumatic valvular vegetations, left atrial thrombus, left
                                            ventricular thrombus,.….etc.

Large vessel disease (macroangiopathy) ≥50 % stenosis or occlusion of an extra- or intracranial major vessel supplying the
~10%                                        territory of the ischemic infarction as shown in duplex or angiographic images
                                            (CTA/MRA)

Small vessel disease (microangiopathy)      CT/MRI shows a small lacunar infarction

or lacunar infarction ~25%

Other determined etiology 2-3%              Other causes identified like vasculitis, dissection, hypercoagulable state or
                                            hematologic disorder
Undetermined etiology 25%                   Two or more causes identified, no etiology identified or incomplete evaluation

                                                                                            University of Alexandria
                          Clinical Picture

►The clinical picture depends on the affected territory and the extent
 of the lesion.
►Cortical signs usually indicate large vessel occlusion (LVO), which
 means the patient needs mechanical thrombectomy.
►Cortical signs are aphasia, head and eye deviation ipsilateral to the
 stroke side, hemigeclect to the hemiplegic side.
►If you don’t have CT-Angiography, you need to know the cortical
 signs.




                                                     University of Alexandria
Anterior circulation                                            Cortical signs usually indicate large vessel occlusion (aphasia, hemineglect to the hemiplegic side,
(common carotid artery, internal carotid artery, middle head and eye deviation to the ipsilateral side).
cerebral artery and anterior cerebral artery)                   UMN facial palsy
                                                                Dysarthria
                                                                Dysphagia
                                                                Weakness (hemiparesis, brachiofacial weakness, hand weakness, lower limb weakness)
                                                                Hyposthesia (hemisensory hyposthesia including the face, hemisensory hyposthesia excluding the
                                                                face, upper or lower limb hyposthesia)
                                                                Amaurosis fugax (transient monooccular visual loss due to affection of the ophthalmic artery)
Posterior circulation                                           Aphasia
(vertebral artery, basilar artery, posterior cerebral artery)   Dysarthria
                                                                Dysphagia
                                                                Disturbed level of consciousness up to coma
                                                                UMN facial palsy
                                                                Weakness (hemiparesis, upper or lower limb weakness)
                                                                Hyposthesia (hemisensory hyposthesia including the face, hemisensory hyposthesia excluding the
                                                                face, upper or lower limb hyposthesia)
                                                                Hemianopia or quadrantanopia
                                                                Ataxia
                                                                Vertigo with or without focal neurological signs (very important: vertigo alone can be the presentation
                                                                of stroke)
                                                                Diplopia                                                  University of Alexandria
                          Clinical Picture

►Always remember, any patient with acute onset coma or disturbed
 level of consciousness, basilar artery occlusion could be the cause.
 Do CT Angiography without any delay.

►Acute onset isolated vertigo is a neurological emergency. You will
 give the patient betaserc, on the next day the patient will die with
 basilar artery occlusion.




                                                     University of Alexandria
FAST




       University of Alexandria
Pronator drift




                 University of Alexandria
                     Case

►48 year-old male patient
►Presented in the neurological ER with transient
 vertical diplopia, which started in the morning
 and disappeared 45 minutes later.
►Medical history: smoking
►Examination: unremarkable


                                    University of Alexandria
                                        University Hospital of Alexandria
University of Alexandria
Case
       48 year-old male
       patient presented
       with left upper
       quadrantanopia




           University of Alexandria
Left hemianopia




                  University of Alexandria
    Left cerebellar infarction (PICA-infarction)

►60 year-old male patient
►Presented in the
 neurological ER with
 recurrent attacks of
 positional vertigo
►The attacks occur on
 standing and gets relieved
 on lying
                                      University of Alexandria
                              Investigations
A. Immediate neuroimaging:
   •   CT brain: to exclude hemorrhage and sometimes demo
   •   CT angiography: if the patient presents within the first 8 hours.
   •   MRI brain: for doubtful cases, difficult cases and for stroke in young.
B. Vascular imaging: extra - and transcranial duplex sonography (essential to assess the
   plaque risk but needs experience) , CTA and/or MRA to look for large vessel occlusion
   or stenosis. For patients presenting within 8hours → do CTA.


C. Laboratory investigations: CBC, urea, creatinine, SGOT, SGPT, FBS, HbA1c, lipid
   profile (Cholesterol, triglyceride, LDL-cholesterol, HDL-cholesterol).
D. Cardiac investigations: ECG,      Echocardiography, 24hours monitoring with atrial
   detection alarm or holter 24h-ECG to look for atrial fibrillation.


                                                                        University of Alexandria
Seagull phenomenon in the right V4 denoting severe stenosis




                                           University of Alexandria
                              Investigatons

For patients with stroke in young (<50 years):

   o Hypercoagulable profile: Antiphospholipid antibodies: Lupus anticoagulant,
     Anticardiolipin IgG/IgM, Anti-β2 glycoprotein, Protein C activity,
     Protein S activity, Antithrombin III, Factor V Leiden mutation,
     Prothrombin gene mutation)

   o Vasculitic profile: ANA, ANCA, Anti-dsDNA, Rheumatoid factor

   o Bubble test in selected cases

                                                          University of Alexandria
Bubble test




              University of Alexandria
Clinical case
          •     68-year-old male
          •     Presentation: right brachiofacial
                weakness since 6 days
          •     NIHSS 3
          •     CT brain: no acute pathology
          •     Past history: DM, HTN, CABG
                (EF 22%)
Left internal carotid
        artery
Left intracranial vessels   Left intracranial vessels
     before stenting              after stenting
                   Acute ischemic Stroke Treatment
► Aim of treatment: reperfusion as soon as possible (Time is brain!).
► Never prescribe aspirin before doing CT brain (fatal mistake). Otherwise, if the stroke
  were hemorrhagic, fatal intracerebral hemorrhage might occur (Never do harm!)
► Intravenous recombinant tissue plasminogen activator (r-tPA): should be given within 4.5 hours
  from time of stroke onset after exclusion of contraindications for tPA.
► Mechanical thrombectomy for patients with large vessel occlusion (LVO) as shown in CTA or
  MRA: should be done within 8 hours from stroke onset.
► However, for patients presenting within 8-24 hours, mechanical thrombectomy could be offered
  for cases with large penumbra demonstrated in CT-perfusion.
► Intravenous tPA and mechanical thrombectomy should be done as soon as possible. For
  patients presenting within 4.5h with LVO, bridging thrombolysis should be done. Bridging means
  the patient should receive tPA and directly transferred to the angiography room for mechanical
  thrombectomy without awaiting the results of the tPA.
► For patients with unwitnessed stroke → advanced neuroimaging → if salvageable tissues, tPA
  and/or mechanical thromectomy can be considered.
► Monitoring in the stroke unit
                                                                       University of Alexandria
Mechanical thrombectomy for MCA occlusion




                                University of Alexandria
                     Case

►58-year-old male patient
►The patient developped recurrent attacks of
 vertigo in the last few days.
►Presentation to an outpatient clinic→
 Assurance and sent to home



                                   University of Alexandria
►2 hours later → Presentation to the neurological ER
 with acute onset coma; his wife found him on the
 floor of the kitchen
►CT brain: unremarkable
►CTA: basilar artery occlusion




                                       University of Alexandria
Basilar artery occlusion




     University of Alexandria
Mechanical
thrombectomy; After
first pass




     University of Alexandria
►After mechanical thrombectomy → marked
 improvement; the patient was discharged with
 mild bilateral lower limb ataxia




                                   University of Alexandria
    Stroke is a preventable disease




You can prevent 8 out of every 9
           strokes!!!



                                University of Alexandria
                                 Secondary Prevention

► Lifestyle modification (tight control of blood pressure, diabetes mellitus, hypertension,
  dyslipidemia, smoking cessation, active life, Mediterranean diet with reduction of salt intake,
  weight loss, stress reduction). Do not underestimate life style modification.
► Single antiplatelet (Aspirin or clopidogrel) and atorvastatin (aim LDL-cholesterol<70 mg/dl or in
  patients with ischemic heart disease LDL-cholesterol <55 mg/dl).
► Double antiplatelets (aspirin and clopidogrel) for the following indications:
    ► High risk TIA or minor stroke: for 21 days (day 0 is the day of stroke onset)
    ► Symptomatic intracranial stenosis for 3 months
► Anticoagulation for patients with high risk cardioembolic stroke (atrial fibrillation)
► In patients with symptomatic common/internal carotid artery stenosis, i.e. stenosis ipsilateral to
  the stroke: carotid stenting or carotid endarterectomy
► There is no role for neurotonics (cerebrolysin, somazina, oxybral….etc) in any
  neurological disease.



                                                                                      University of Alexandria
    Bildergebnis für University of Alexandria




Inracerebral Hemorrhage
                              Etiology

►Age<40 years: usually arteriovenous malformation.
►Age >40 years: hypertension is the most common etiology. The
 hemorrhage occurs in typical hypertensive sites: thalamus, basal
 ganglia, pons, cerebellum.
►Other etiologies: anticoagulant therapy, brain tumor, venous sinus
 thrombosis, dural arteriovenous fistula, coagulopathy, trauma and
 cerebral amyloid angiopathy.




                                                   University of Alexandria
                  Clinical Picture

►Acute onset focal neurological deficits
 (aphasia, dysarthria, hemiparesis..etc.)
►Increased intracranial pressure with vomiting
►It is not possible to differentiate between
 ischemic and hemorrhagic stroke based on
 the clinical picture.


                                     University of Alexandria
                          Investigations

►CT and/or MRI brain
►CTA/MRA or in some cases
 diagnostic cerebral angiography: if
 the location is atypical for
 hypertensive ICH or in young
 patients<40 years.




                                           University of Alexandria
                             Treatment

►In patients with high blood pressure, immediate reduction of the
 blood pressure (aim systolic blood pressure<140 mmHg) helps
 significantly to reduce further bleeding.
►Supportive measures
►Reversal of anticoagulation for patients on anticoagulants, for e.g.
 ICH under warfarin should be reversed using prothrombin complex
 (PPSB) and vitamin K intravenous, for ICH under heparin, protamin
 sulfate should be given.
►In selected cases, surgical evacuation or craniectomy.



                                                    University of Alexandria
    Bildergebnis für University of Alexandria




Subarachnoid Hemorrhage
                             Etiology

►In 85% of the cases, ruptured
 aneurysm
►In few cases, traumatic,
 arteriovenous malformation,
 dural arteriovenous fistula




                                        University of Alexandria
                                  Clinical Picture

• A significant proportion of patients die immediately before reaching the hospital.

• Thunderclap headache with two important criteria:

    ► very severe headache described as the worst headache of my life,

    ► Thunderclap, which means sudden onset of severe headache, in contrast to
       migrainous hedache, which begins with mild headache then progresses to moderate
       or severe headache within 30-60 minutes.

• According to the location and severity of hemorrhage, the patient might develop acute
  onset focal neurological deficits (aphasia, dysarthria, hemiparesis..etc.) or coma.
                                                                     University of Alexandria
                 Investigations

►CT and/or MRI brain
►Vascular imaging using
 CTA/MRA as well as
 diagnostic cerebral
 angiography (DSA): to
 demonstrate the
 aneurysm.

                                  University of Alexandria
                          Complications

►Rebleeding: can be fatal, so that urgent treatment of the aneurysm is
 recommended
►Vasospasm (peak 4-14 days): the pat. develops focal neurological
 deficits, can be detected with transcranial duplex. To primarily
 prevent vasospasm, nimodipine 60 mg/4h from up to 21-28 days is
 recommended.
►Hydrocephalus: presents with reduction of the level of
 consciousness. In case of hydrocephalus → external ventricular
 drainage should be urgently done.



                                                    University of Alexandria
TCD showing vasospasm of the MCA




                           University of Alexandria
                         Treatment

►Supportive measures including analgesics, for example
 using paracetamol 1000 mg i.v.
►Good hydration
►Nimodipin 60 mg every 4 hours to be started immediately
 as a prophylaxis against vasoconstriction (monitor the blood
 pressure)
►Coiling of the aneurysm as soon as possible (surgical
 clipping is obsolete)


                                             University of Alexandria
University of Alexandria
