SOURCE: Semester 8\Neuro\Theoritical\PPT\L15) substance related disorder and psychiatry emergency.pdf

Substance-Related
    Disorders


           Dr.Mohamed Abdelaal
                    MBBCh, MSc, MRCPsych, MD
             lecturer of psychiatry, Alexandria University




   mohamed.abdelkarim@alexmed.edu.eg
Addiction
• Addiction is defined as a chronic, relapsing brain disease that is
  characterized by compulsive drug seeking and use, despite harmful
  consequences.
• It is considered a brain disease because drugs change the brain
  (change its structure and how it works).
• These brain changes can be long lasting and can lead to the harmful
  behaviors seen in people who abuse drugs
• The patient high tendency to relapse after withdrawal
Addiction
❑PFC plays a major role in addiction
❑Executive functions (EF) (E.g., decision making, weighing risk against
 reward, and resisting limbic impulses) are controlled through the
 Prefrontal cortex (PFC).
❑The EF are impaired in addictive patients.
Why do some people become addicted to
alcohol and drugs, while others don’t?
As with any other health condition, vulnerability to addiction differs for
each individual. There are certain risk factors that make addiction
more likely.
Risk factor to addiction
1. Genetics (may account for up to 60% of vulnerability to addiction)
2. Early developmental influences and environmental factors
3. Effects of stressful life events across a person’s life
4. Mental disorders, such as depression or anxiety
The Brain’s Limbic System
❑The limbic system is involved in many of our emotions and
 motivations, particularly those related to survival such as fear and
 anger.
❑ The limbic system also regulates feelings of pleasure such as those
 associated with eating and sex.
❑The feelings of pleasure, a part of our “reward system,” are very
 powerful.
❑ Drugs of abuse activate this reward system.
Brain Reward system

❑The brain reward system plays a key role in the initiation and maintenance of
 drug abuse and addiction.
❑The brain reward system comprises mainly dopaminergic neurons, whose cell
 bodies are located in the ventral tegmental area (VTA)
❑VTA cells project to
   ❖nucleus accumbens (NAc)
   ❖Hippocampus
   ❖Amygdala
   ❖prefrontal cortex.
❑It was found that all drugs of abuse stimulate, directly or indirectly, the
 dopaminergic neurons located in the ventral tegmental area (VTA) and thereby
 increase the dopamine tone.
Brain Reward system
Behavioral Addiction
❑Behavioral addictions or non-substance addictions are a set
 of behaviors that a person becomes dependent on and craves like
 Food, Gaming, Sex Social Media, Gambling, Internet, Risks,
 Shopping and Pornography.

❑It involves a compulsion to engage in a rewarding non-
 substance related behavior sometimes called a natural
 reward[ despite any negative consequences to the person's
 physical, mental, social or financial well-being
Clinical presentations
I. Substance use disorders: as substance dependence disorder.
II. Substance induced disorders: one or more of the following can be
induced:
         1. Intoxication.              6. Mood disorders.
         2. Withdrawal.                7. Anxiety disorders.
         3. Delirium.                  8. Sexual disorders.
         4. Dementia.                  9. Sleep disorders.
         5. Psychosis.
Classification
1. Depressants     Alcohol,
                   benzodiazepines



2. Stimulants      Cocaine,
                   amphetamines

3. Hallucinogens   LSD,
                   phencyclidine,
                   ketamine.


4. Opiates         Heroin,
                   morphine,
                   pethidine


5. Cannabinoids    Cannabis

6. Others          Tramadol, nicotine, caffeine, inhalants, others (e.g., anabolic
                   steroids).
The Trans theoretical Model (Stages of
Change)
1. Pre-contemplation: the stage at which there is no intention to chan
   ge behavior in the foreseeable future. Many individuals in this stage
   are unaware of their problems.

2. Contemplation: the stage in which people are aware that a problem
   exists and are seriously thinking about overcoming it but have not y
   et made a commitment to take action.
3. Preparation: the stage that combines intention and behavioral crite
   ria. Individuals in this stage are intending to take action in the next
   month and have unsuccessfully taken action in the past year.
The Trans theoretical Model (Stages of
Change)
4. Action: the stage in which individuals modify their behavior, experie
   nces, or environment in order to overcome their problems. The acti
   on involves the most overt behavioral changes and requires conside
   rable commitment of time and energy.
5. Maintenance: is the stage in which people work to prevent relapse
   and consolidate the gains attained during the action. For addictive b
   ehaviors, this stage extends from six months to an indeterminate pe
   riod past the initial action.
6. Relapse: The person falls back into old patterns of behavior
Steps of Treatment
1. Treatment of the presenting symptoms and pain:
  ❑ABC measures for coma
  ❑antipsychotics for psychosis and agitation
  ❑antidepressants for depression
  ❑ anticonvulsants for seizures
  ❑sedating drugs for insomnia
  ❑pain killers
Steps of Treatment
2. Detoxification or harm reduction:
   ❑Detoxification treats the acute physiological effects of stopping
    drug use.
   ❑Detoxification does not produce lasting behavioral changes
    necessary for recovery (doesn’t deal with psychological aspect of
    addiction )
   ❑Medications are available for detoxification from opiates,
    nicotine, benzodiazepines, alcohol, barbiturates, and other
    sedatives.
Steps of Treatment
3. Rehabilitation:
   ❑address the psychological, social, and behavioral problems associated with
    addiction.
   ❑examples
      ❖CBT
      ❖Motivational interviewing
      ❖ 12 steps model.
      ❖Family therapy
Pharmacotherapy for addiction
I. Alcohol
❖Acamprosate:
  ❑GABA agonist with little abuse potential is already in use in Europe for the tr
   eatment of alcohol dependence.
❖Disulfiram (Antabuse):
  ❑It inhibits aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH).
  ❑ If alcohol is ingested after ALDH is inhibited, blood acetaldehyde levels rise,
   which produce the DER (Disulfiram-ethanol-reaction).
  ❑The DER is an aversive reaction that is thought to prevent drinking
Pharmacotherapy for addiction
II. Opiates:
❖Narcotic Antagonist (Naltrexone): (Long-acting opiate antagonist)
   ❑Individuals must be opiate-free for several days before naltrexone to prevent opiate abstinence
    syndrome.
   ❑It can produce an aversion reaction if opiates are received.
   ❑Naltrexone most useful for highly motivated patients to avoid poor compliance.
   ❑For less motivated patients “harm reduction” can be done using methadone or buprenorphine.
    Their long-acting agonistic effect prevent the craving effect of short acting agonists (as heroin)
    .
   Pharmacotherapy for addiction
II. Opiates:
❖Methadone (long-acting opioid agonist):
   ❑It occupies mu-opioid receptors and blocks the reinforcing euphorigenic effects of other o
    pioids.
   ❑ It prevents opiate withdrawal, blocks the effects of illicit opiate use, and decreases opiate
    craving.
❖Buprenorphine (opioid partial agonist):
   ❑It binds more tightly to the mu-opioid receptor than most other opioids, such as morphine
    or heroine, so blocks other opioid from binding to the receptor.
   ❑Patients taking buprenorphine cannot increase the positive or adverse opioid effects of
    buprenorphine beyond a ceiling dose (about 16mg/day) by taking more buprenorphine or
    other opioids.
   ❑It is safer than Methadone because its opiate agonist activity has a ceiling
   ❑Lengthy half-life may allow it to be dispensed once every 3 or even 4 days.
 Pharmacotherapy for addiction
III. Nicotine:
❖Nicotine replacement therapies
   ❑(e.g., the nicotine patch, nicotine gum and lozenge) it relieves craving and withdrawal
    symptoms
❖Nicotine receptor partial agonist (varenicline)
❖Nicotine receptor antagonist
   ❑(bupropion which has dopaminergic action to help with craving and depression)
 Pharmacotherapy for addiction
IV. Cannabis:
❖CB1 agonist (Dronabinol)
  ❑Analogous to opiate agonist.
  ❑It decreases marijuana craving & withdrawal symptoms (as anxiety, trouble sleeping
   and chills).
Psychiatry emergency


             Dr.Mohamed Abdelaal
                      MBBCh, MSc, MRCPsych, MD
               lecturer of psychiatry, Alexandria University




     mohamed.abdelkarim@alexmed.edu.eg
Neuroleptic Malignant Syndrome
• life-threatening neurologic emergency associated with the use of
  antipsychotic (neuroleptic) agents
• tetrad
   • mental status change
   • Rigidity
   • fever
   • Dysautonomia
• mortality >>>10 and 20 percent.
Neuroleptic Malignant Syndrome
• Incidence >0.02 to 3 percent among patients taking antipsychotic
  agents.
• Occurs in males >females (2:1).
 • Age is not a risk factor.
Neuroleptic Malignant Syndrome
• D2 receptor antagonism
  • hypothalamus may cause hyperthermia and other signs of dysautonomia
  • nigrostriatal > rigidity and tremor

  Associated Medications
  1. Antipsychotics: either typical or atypical but more common with typical
  antipsychotics
  2. Antiemetic drugs: like metoclopramide and promethazine
  3. Rapid withdrawal of antiparkinsonian drugs
Neuroleptic Malignant Syndrome
• Laboratory findings
   ❖increased white blood cell (WBC) count
   ❖ increase creatinine phosphokinase
   ❖Increase liver enzymes
   ❖ electrolyte disturbances
   ❖ metabolic acidosis
   ❖increase plasma myoglobin
   ❖myoglobinuria, occasionally associated with renal failure.
Neuroleptic Malignant Syndrome
Treatment
1. Admission at ICU
2. Airway and breathing need to be protected if there is evidence of
compromise. Severe cases
may require circulatory and ventilatory support
3. Intravenous (IV) benzodiazepines for agitation
4. The offending drug should be discontinued.
Neuroleptic Malignant Syndrome
Treatment
5. IV fluids should be given for dehydration.
6. Cooling devices and antipyretics are used to treat hyperthermia.
7. If rhabdomyolysis and acute kidney injury >>dialysis
8. Dopaminergic drugs, such as bromocriptine and amantadine and
muscle relaxants, such as dantrolene sodium.
9. Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT)
Catatonia
• Catatonia is a clinical syndrome characterized by
   • motoric immobility or excitement
   • profound negativism
   • echolalia (mimicry of speech)
   • echopraxia (mimicry of movement).
Catatonia
• Laboratory Examination
• There are no pathognomonic laboratory findings in catatonia.
• The laboratory evaluation should be used to rule out an underlying
  medical condition
Catatonia
Treatment
 hospitalization and assisted with hygiene.
 Fluid and nutrient intake
 identifying and correcting the underlying medical or pharmacological
cause.
 Benzodiazepines can provide temporary improvement in symptoms
 ECT
Suicide (Deliberate Self-Harm)
• Suicide >>>intentional taking of one’s life in a culturally non endorsed
  manner
• Attempted suicide >> unsuccessful suicidal act with a nonfatal
  outcome.
Suicide (Deliberate Self-Harm)
Epidemiology
• Suicide accounts for (1 to 2%) of total global mortality (1 in 6000/year)
• Male to female ratio is (64%: 36%)
Methods used:
Common methods used
❖Ingestion of poison (commonest in females)
❖hanging(commonest in males)
❖ burning, drowning, falling from heights
❖ jumping in front of trainsor vehicles
Suicide (Deliberate Self-Harm)
Etiology
• Psychiatric disorders
major depression disorder, schizophrenia, alcohol and substance abuse,
personality, dementia and delirium.
• Physical disorders
chronic or incurable physical disorders like AIDS or cancer.
• Psychosocial factors
failure in exams, marital problems, loss of loved ones, isolations and
alienations from social groups, financial and occupational difficulties
Suicide (Deliberate Self-Harm)
Risk Factors
• Age > 40 yrs
• Male gender
• single
• Previous suicidal attempts
• Suicidal preoccupations
• Sense of worthlessness and depression
• Chronis illness
• Drug and alcohol dependence
• Higher degree of impulsivity
• Recent stressful life events and serious loss
Suicide (Deliberate Self-Harm)
Warning Signs of Suicide
• Appearing depressed or sad most of the time
• Feeling hopeless, expressing hopelessness
• Withdrawal from family and friends
• Sleeping too much or too little
• Making overt statements like ‘I can’t take it anymore or I wish I was
dead’
• Losing interest in most activities
• Giving away prized possessions
Suicide (Deliberate Self-Harm)
Management
 Be aware of the warning signs
 Monitor the patient’s safety needs:
   • Take all suicidal threats or attempts seriously
   • Search for toxic agents like alcohol or drugs
   • Don’t leave drug tray within the reach of the patients
   • Remove sharps instruments from the environment
   • Remove straps and clothing like belts
   • Don’t allow the patient to bolt the door from inside
   • Someone should accompany to the bathroom
   • Patient should never be left alone
   • Spend most of time with the patient and encourage him to ventilate his emotions and to
   talk about suicidal plans/methods
   • Enhance self-esteem by focusing on his strengths
Suicide (Deliberate Self-Harm)
• Management
• Treatment of the underlying psychiatric disorder
• ECT is an emergency treatment tool for suicide
• Counselling and guidance:
   • To deal with the desire to attempt suicide
   • To deal with ongoing life stressors and teaching new coping skills
mohamed.abdelkarim@alexmed.edu.eg
