SOURCE: Semester 8\Neuro\Theoritical\PPT\L2) Multiple sclerosis.pdf

Prof .Dr .Ghada Abdel Hady Ashmawy
             Prof Of Neurology
           Faculty Of Medicine
          Alexandria University


   MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS
    Learning objectives
 1- Define the multiple sclerosis
 2- Recognize Pathogenesis and

  Pathophysiology
 3- Define Risk Factors

 4- Recognize the clinical picture

 5- Determine the management
            Demyelinating Diseases
    A demyelinating disease is any disease of the nervous
    system in which the myelin sheath of neurons is damaged.

 Demyelinating diseases are traditionally classified in two
  kinds:
    Demyelinating Myelinoclastic Diseases
normal and healthy myelin is destroyed by a toxic, chemical or
autoimmune substance e.g. multiple sclerosis)
    Demyelinating Leukodystrophic Diseases ( Dysmyelinating
  Diseases) , describes an inborn error of metabolism affecting
  myelinogenesis that causes it to be abnormal, arrested, or
  delayed
                                                               
Multiple Sclerosis
            Multiple Sclerosis
             Definition
 Multiple sclerosis (MS) is the
  most       common        chronic
  inflammatory, demyelinating and
  neurodegenerative disease of the
  central nervous system in young
  adults
   In most patients, reversible
    episodes     of     neurological
    dysfunction lasting several days
    or weeks characterize the
    initial stages of the disease
    (that   is, clinically isolated
    syndrome      and     relapsing–
    remitting MS)..
 A key principle for diagnosing
  MS is to uncover evidence that
 demonstrates lesions in the
  central nervous system (brain
  and spinal cord) showing
  “dissemination in space” (DIS –
  suggestions of damage in more
  than one place in the nervous
  system)
 and “dissemination in time”
  (DIT – suggestions that damage
  has occurred more than once).
                                      The Pathogenesis And
                                        Pathophysiology
 The dysregulation of the BBB increases the trans-endothelial
  migration of activated leukocytes, including macrophages, T
  cells and B cells, into the CNS, which leads to further
  inflammation and demyelination, followed by oligodendrocyte
  loss, reactive gliosis and neuro-axonal degeneration.
 The attack causes inflammation that eventually leads to
  sclerosis, which is the medical term for scarring
 Figure 1 Schematic diagram of impulse
 conduction in normal (upper panel) and
 demyelinated (lower panel) regions of a nerve
 fiber. The solid arrow indicates the direction
 of impulse conduction; the shaded area
 indicates the region occupied by the impulse.
 Currentflow is indicated by the broken arrows.
 In normally myelinated regions (top), the hig
 resistance, low capacitance directs the
 majority of action current to the next node of
 Ranvier. In contrast, in demyelinated regions
 (bottom), action current is short-circuited
 through the damaged myelin sheath or
 denuded regions of the axon, and hence
 further propagation of the action potential is
 blocked. (Reprinted with permission from
 Waxman, S. G. 1982, "Membranes, myelin, and
 the pathophysiology of multiple sclerosis," N
 Engl J Med, vol. 306, pp. 1529-1533.)
             The Pathogenesis And
               Pathophysiology:


 The pathological hallmark of MS
  plaques is the accumulation of
  demyelinating lesions that occur in the
  white matter of the brain and spinal
  cord.
 They are typically located around post-
  capillary venules
              Risk Factors
 The pathogenesis and pathophysiology of MS remains
  incompletely understood.
 This disorder is a heterogeneous, multifactorial, immune-
  mediated disease( T and B cs mediated) that is influenced by
  both
 1-Genetic such as the human leukocyte antigen (HLA) genes on
  chromosome 6, including(HLA)DRB1*15:01polymorphisms( 3-
  4 risk)
 2- Environmental Factors (modifiable factors)such as

 Smoking,

 Low Vitamin D Level,

 Epstein–barr Virus (EBV) Infectious mononucleosis),

 Obesity

 Gut microbiome
                           Risk Factors


   Symptoms usually begin during young adulthood,
    with the peak onset at age 24. (20-40)

   MS has a predilection for whites, especially those of
    northern European heritage.
                   Risk Factors


 Women are affected more than men (Ratio ~3:1)..
 Pregnancy does not alter the risk of developing MS,

  but it does seem to influence disease activity
 The annualized relapse rate drops from

  approximately 0.56 to 0.12 by the third trimester, but
  this is offset by an increase to 1.2 in the first 3
  postpartum months
                                  Q1

   Which age group is MS most likely to strike?
   A. Children under 12
   B. Teens
   C. Adults ages 20 to 40
   D. Adults ages 65 and older
                                  Q1

   Which age group is MS most likely to strike?
   A. Children under 12
   B. Teens
   C. Adults ages 20 to 40
   D. Adults ages 65 and older
                                       Subtypes of MS
The temporal course of MS can
be described by one of four
categories:
 1- Relapsing-Remitting (RR),
    (87%) which characterized by unpre- dictable acute attacks followed by
    periods of remission


   2- Secondary Progressive (SP),
    Nearly 65% of patients with RRMS will subsequently develop SPMS
    which is considered the second phase of this disease


 3-primary Progressive (PP),
  (  10-15%)


 4- and Progressive Relapsing

  (PR).
            Relapsing Remitting
 -Symptoms of a clinical attack
  (relapse) typically show an acute
  or sub-acute onset, worsen with a
  duration of at least 24 hours ,over
  days or weeks, reach a peak
  severity within 2–3 weeks and
 (remit )to a variable degree,
  ranging from minimal resolution to
  complete recovery normally 2–4
  weeks after reaching maximum
  deficit and In the absence of fever
  or infection
      Clinical picture
      The clinical presentation of MS is
  heterogeneous multifocal and depends on the
location of demyelinating lesions within the CNS
                     optic neuritis
                          (ON)
   The initial symptom of MS is optic neuritis (ON) in
    14% to 23% of patients, and more than 50%
    experience a clinical episode of ON during their
    lifetime.
 The most common manifestation is visual loss in one
  eye that evolves over a few days.
 Periocular pain, especially with eye movement,

  usually accompanies and may precede the visual
  symptoms.
                 Sensory symptoms
 Sensory symptoms are the most common presenting
  manifestation in MS (21% to 55%) Loss of sensation
  (numbness), paresthesias (tingling), dysesthesias
  (burning), and hyperesthesias are common.
 Impairment of vibration and joint position sensation,

  and reduced pain and light touch perception.
 These symptoms can temporarily worsen with

  increased body temperature and resolve when the
  body temperature cools to normal or after a period of
  rest (known as Uhthoff phenomenon).
                  Motor manifestations

     2- Motor manifestations is common in MS
      and are characterized by pyramidal signs
      (such as Babinski sign, more- pronounced
      reflexes and clonus), paresis and spasticity




Exaggerated                             Babinski
reflexes                 clonus         sign
                     Cerebellar pathways

 Cerebellar pathways are frequently involved during
  the course of MS, but a predominately cerebellar
  syndrome is uncommon at onset.
 The manifestations include dysmetria,
  dysdiadochokinesia, action tremor with terminal
  accentuation, dysrhythmia, and loss of balance




dysdiadochokinesia   action tremor with terminal   Dysmetria
                             accentuation
              Visceral complaints


 Urinary urgency, frequency, and urge
  incontinence Constipation
 Sexual dysfunction
          Brainstem

 Intense vertigo
 the trigeminal nerve is frequently

  involved
 Dysphagia is often due to impairment
  of cranial nerves IX, X, and XII
 Internuclear ophthalmoplegia
Internuclear Ophthalmoplegia, is the most
common cause of diplopia in MS patients


                                              normal




                                        Internuclear
                                        ophthalmoplegia




                                            convergence
Internuclear ophthalmoplegia
         Fatigue and cognitive function


   Fatigue Over 75% of MS patients
    experience fatigue during their disease
    course.

   Cognitive Disorders are now known to
    be present in 40% to 70% of MS
    patients
              Paroxysmal symptoms
 Paroxysmal symptoms are characteristic of MS
 Symptoms are typically brief (seconds to 2
  minutes) and recur frequently, occasionally
  dozens of times per day.
 Tonic Spasms

 Trigeminal neuralgia

 Lhermitte's sign (transient sensory symptoms
  usually precipitated by neck flexion) is usually
  described as an electrical or tingling sensation
  that travels down the spine or into the
  extremities.
                          Q2
 Which is the most common cranial nerve affected in
  multiple sclerosis
             i. The vagus nerve
            ii. The facial nerve
            iii. The optic nerve
            iv. The olfactory nerve
                          Q2
 Which is the most common cranial nerve affected in
  multiple sclerosis
             i. The vagus nerve
            ii. The facial nerve
            iii. The optic nerve
            iv. The olfactory nerve
                 Differential Diagnosis
                      (Multifocal)

1-    Vasculitis e.g., systemic lupus erythromatosis.
2-    Behcet ` s disease (oral genital ulcer and uveitis).
3-    Acute disseminated encephalomyelitis.
4-    Lymphoma.
5- Neuromyelitis optica
6-MOG antibody disease
                      Evaluation

                                  for diagnosis of MS
    The 2017 revision of the McDonald criteria
  is based on the demonstration of white matter
  lesions disseminated in time(At least two attacks in
  between at least 1 month) and space in the absence
  of another identifiable explanation.
 MS remains a clinical diagnosis, although MRI,
  evoked potentials, and CSF examination can help
  clarify less certain cases.
The 2024 revision of the McDonald criteria for diagnosis of
RRMS depends on dissemination in time and space
                          MRI

 1-MRI brain (T2-weighted images) and spinal
  cord:
 The investigation of choice to support the
  diagnosis of MS by detection of MS plaques.
 ✓ The plaques typically are seen in the white
  matter of the brain and spinal cord; typically,
  in the periventricular region, juxtacortical and
  infratentorial regions of the brain and in the
  spinal cord
 ✓ Contrast enhanced lesions gadolinium-
  based contrast denotes recent disease activity.
.
Common Sites Of Lesions
        Periventricular
         Juxtacortical
         Optic Nerve
          Spinal Cord
           Cerbellum
para magnetic rim lesions   central vein sign
                           CSF
 Oligoclonal bands [OCB]: A subtype of globulin can be detected in the
  CSF of MS patient . It is helpful in confirming the diagnosis.
 Kappa free light chain index

 The presence of myelin components, antimyelin antibodies

 ✓ Increased IgG index; due to increased intrathecal production of IgG.

 -A lymphocytic pleocytosis occurs during acute exacerbations in about
  one third of patients
              Evoked potentials
   VEP: More than 90% of persons with a history of ON
    have an abnormal VEP,




  and somatosensory evoked potentials (SSEPs) may
  detect subclinical sites of demyelination, thus providing
  evidence of multifocality.
 Brain stem auditory evoked potentials (BAEPs) are
  occasionally informative
                       Treatment
 There is no available prevention or cure
  for MS. Treatments focus on three areas:
 Treating Acute Exacerbations(relapse) And

  Hastening Their Recovery;
 Altering The Natural course Of MS;

 And Providing Symptomatic Relief Of

  Current Symptoms By Enhancing Physical
  Abilities And Preventing Or Treating
  Complications
                Acute Exacerbations
                     (relapse )


 Corticosteroids are the most commonly used
  treatment for MS, although there have been few
  studies to address their efficacy.
 Intravenous Methylprednisolone Became The

  Preferred Treatments
        Alteration of the Natural Course
                       DMT

 The primary goal of drug treatment is to alter the
  natural course of the disease
 (e.g., reducing the frequency

 and severity of relapses,

 preventing the chronic progressive phase,

 and slowing the progression of disability).
        Disease Modifying Therapy DIT
   β-Interferons
   Interferon-β 1b (Betaseron)
    subcutaneous injection every other day.



   Interferon-β 1a (Avonex)
   Once-weekly intramuscular                     Combined Azathioprine and
                                                  Interferon-β 1b
                                                  Methotrexate
Non symptomatic MS, RRMS, and SPMS                Intravenous Immunoglobulin
                                                  rituximab
                     Recent drugs
Tysabri® Natalizumab.
Aubagio® (teriflunomide), 14 mg once daily.
Gilenya (fingolimod)® 0.5 mg cap once daily
Cladribine (mavenclad) 10 mg
Ocrevus(ocrelizumab) infusion every 6 m for 1ry
progressive type
          Symptomatic Treatment of
          Existing Disabilities



Spasticity                baclofen.
 Fatigue                   Amantadine at 100mg
                                     twice a day
   Paroxysmal Symptoms   carbamazepine
References
          ILA 1
   A 24-year-old right-handed student female was
    studying late at night for an examination. As she
    looked at her textbook, she experienced a numbness
    sensation in the left foot and her entire left leg. The
    feeling lasted 1 week and then slowly went away.
    She dismissed the complaint, recalling that she had
    similar symptoms 6 months ago. She remembered
    that 2 years ago her left eye became blurred and her
    vision went out and in 1 week, her vision returned to
    normal. She had not seen a physician for any of
    these previous symptoms. She decided to seek
    medical consultation the next day.
   What is wrong with this women ?
 Psychic
 Organic
      What is the lesion?




   From the above history
        Where is the lesion?


 Examination was significant for brisk reflexes
  and sustained clonus at the right ankle. Babinski
  sign was present on the right .
 What is the most likely diagnosis in this case and

  the investigations needed to confirm the
  diagnosis?
Localisation (central or peripheral)
 Sensory (superficial deep cortical) ( site )
 Motor LMN (site )

        (pyramidal UMN ,
         extra pyramidal

    Cerebellum
    Other cranial nerves
   A 24-year-old right-handed student female was
    studying late at night for an examination. As she
    looked at her textbook, she experienced a numbness
    sensation in the left foot and her entire left leg. The
    feeling lasted 1 week and then slowly went away. She
    dismissed the complaint, recalling that she had similar
    symptoms 6 months ago. She remembered that 2 years
    ago her left eye became blurred and her vision went out
    and in 1 week, her vision returned to normal. She had
    not seen a physician for any of these previous
    symptoms. She decided to seek medical consultation the
    next day
   Examination was significant for brisk reflexes
    and sustained clonus at the right ankle. Babinski
    sign was present on the right.
   What is the most likely diagnosis?
 1- Seizure
 2-Transient ischemic attack

 3-Parkinson`s disease

 4-Anaplastic astrocyoma

 5- Multiple sclerosis
           Next step


What are the investigations?
 MRI brain with contrast
 CSF analysis

 VEP
Test yourself
                                 q2
 A 35 year old white female. She came to Neurology Clinic for
  evaluation of her long-term neurologic complaints. The patient
  relates that for many years she had noticed some significant
  changes in neurologic functions, particularly heat intolerance
  precipitating a stumbling gait and a tendency to fall. Her visual
  acuity also seemed to change periodically during several years.
  Two months ago the patient was working very hard and was
  under a lot of stress. She got sick with flu and her neurologic
  condition worsened. At that time, she could not hold objects in her
  hands, had significant tremors and severe exhaustion. She also
  had several bad falls.. Then, the patient abruptly developed a
  right hemisensory deficit after several days of work.
 ◆ What is the most likely diagnosis?

 ◆ What is the next diagnostic step?

 ◆ What is the next step in therapy?
                       Q3
 Which of the following treatment used in multiple
  sclerosis relapse
              a. β-Interferons
              b. methyl prednisolone
              c. Methotrexate
              d. Intravenous Immunoglobulin
                     Q4
 If symptoms and a physical exam suggest MS,
  how does a healthcare provider confirm it?
 A. MRI brain

 B. Spinal tap

 C. Visual evoked potential (VEP) tests

 D. All of the above
Thank you
