SOURCE: Semester 8\Neuro\Theoritical\PPT\L3) Somatization.pdf

     SOMATIZATION
  (SOMATIC SYMPTOM and
   RELATED DISORDERS)
                   Dr. Osama Elkhouli
     Professor of Psychiatry, Alexandria University
     Fellow of American Academy of Sleep Medicine
Clinical Fellow of Stanford Sleep Clinic, California , USA
 Research Coordinator of Mount Sinai Hospital, McGill
              University, Montreal, Canada
       Learning Objectives
(the what, the why and the how?)
1. Why learning about “distressing somatic
   symptoms” is essential for your medical
   training?
2. What are “somatic symptom and related
   disorders”-SSRD?
3. How to recognize and conceptualize SSRD?
4. What are the best management plan
   strategies to deal with this spectrum of
   disorders?
                    Clinical case
⚫ 40 yo married mother of an 11 yo son. She regularly sees her
  GP over many years. Her complaints have varied and include
  abdominal pain, dysuria, dysmennorhea, and tiredness.
⚫ Over the years she has been referred to gynecologists,
  urologists, and general surgeons.
⚫ Extensive investigations have revealed no clear cause for her
  symptoms. Despite this, she remains convinced that she has a
  serious physical illness that remains undiagnosed. She
  demands further referrals and further investigations. She is
  disabled by her symptoms and is unable to work.

• What to do next if you are the GP?
• What would you advise the GP, if you are a
specialist?
                 Definition
Somatization: is a clinical state characterized by
⚫ symptoms without demonstrable physical
  abnormality
⚫ role of psychological factors in initiating and
  maintaining symptoms
⚫ symptoms and health concerns not under the
  patient’s conscious control.
 (DSM-IV) classifies somatoform
           disorders
⚫ Somatization disorder *
⚫ Undifferentiated somatoform disorder
⚫ Conversion disorder *
⚫ Pain disorder
⚫ Hypochondriasis *
⚫ Body dysmorphic disorder *
⚫ Somatoform disorder not otherwise
 specified (NOS)
Moved to OCD
  How can you explain somatic
         complaints?
• Masked presentation of psychiatric illness
• Amplifying perceptual style
• Attention obtained from illness
 • Lack of attention to nonsomatic expression
of distress
• Social/cultural norms- devalue psychological
suffering
 SOMATIC SYMPTOM DISORDER
    (Somatization Disorder)
• A disorder characterized by multiple somatic
  complaints requiring medical attention, but not
  associated with any physical disorder..
• Prevalence estimated to be 4-6 % but may be as
  high as 15 %
• Commonly appears in persons 20 to 30 years of
  age
• Male=female
• Occurs in about 3 percent of medical students
  usually in the first two years
• Typical     patient,     unmarried,     of     lower
  socioeconomic status, living in a rural area..
                  Management
❑ Primary care practitioner should direct care;
❑ Regularly scheduled visits every 4-6 weeks; visits should
  be kept short.
❑ Perform at least part of a physical examination should be
  done each visit. Avoid diagnostic tests, operative procedures
  unless clearly indicated.
❑ Look for signs of disease rather than being symptom
  focused.
❑ Understand symptoms in terms of emotional
  communication rather than disease.
❑ GROUP psychotherapy provide social support and relieve
  anxiety
❑ Pharmacotherapy for underlying depression or anxiety
Undifferentiated somatoform disorder
⚫ A milder form of somatization disorder which requires
  fewer symptoms for diagnosis.
⚫ 30 to 100 times more prevalent than full-blown
  somatization disorder.
⚫ E.g. a patient with chest pain and no coronary artery
  disease
⚫ Comorbidity with other psychiatric conditions
  (depression, anxiety, personality disorder) is found in
  about 50% of patients.
⚫ Treatment is similar to that for somatization disorder.
          Conversion Disorder:
⚫ "a disturbance of bodily functioning that does
  not conform to current concepts of the central
  or peripheral nervous system".
⚫ It usually occurs during times of stress.
⚫ "La belle indifference“
⚫ symbolic nature of the symptom
⚫ is not under the patient’s conscious control.
⚫ Women are more frequently affected..
⚫ Hysterionic personality
⚫ SUDDEN, SYMBOLIC, SECONDARY GAIN.
  STRESS, SUGGESTION
    Conversion Disorder Criteria
⚫ One or more symptoms of altered voluntary motor
  or sensory function
⚫ Clinically: incompatibility between symptom and
  neurological condition
⚫ Symptom not better explained by another medical
  or mental disorder
⚫ There is significant distress
⚫ SPECIFIERS: acute vs persistent
⚫ SPECIFIERS:      with paralysis, with abnormal
  movement, with swallowing symptoms, with
  speech symptom, with seizures, with anesthesia,
  with special sensory symptom, or mixed
   What is Incompatability---!!!!
⚫ Hoover’s sign
  Examples of conversion disorder:
⚫ Astasia-abasia: a staggering ataxic gait with jerks and
  thrashing of the upper upper extremities; often with
  inability to stand without support
a patient may not be able to walk, but can dance.
⚫ Pseudoseizures: paroxysmal episodes of seizure-like
  behavior, without clinical features or EEG findings of
  epilepsy.
No self-harm, long duration, secondary gain, no
  urinary incontence
⚫ Sensory symptoms: Anesthesia, hypesthesia,
  paresthesia – distributions not physiologic. Example:
  anesthesia of one entire limb.
⚫ Hysterical blindness: pupils react to light.
(Hypochondriasis)
   Body dysmorphic disorder
⚫ Preoccupation with an imagined defect in
  appearance, or excessive concern over a slight
  physical anomaly.
⚫ The distressing preoccupation may involve any
  part of the body; e.g. imagined or slight flaws of
  the face or head such as acne, scars, thinning
  hair, facial asymmetry, or excessive facial hair
  Body dysmorphic disorder
           (cont)
⚫ The onset often occurs during adolescence, with
  the male-to-female ratio being almost equal

⚫ Many of these patients have had consultations
  with surgeons and dermatologists.

⚫ most patients are secretive about their
  symptoms and are reluctant to seek psychiatric
  treatment.

⚫ Patients with BDD often are poor candidates
  because they are unlikely to be satisfied with the
  results
         FACTITIOUS ILLNESS
1)   Intentional   feigning   of   physical   or   psychological
     symptoms;

2) Motivation for the behavior is the sick role;

3) Absence of obvious External incentive for the behavior
  (economic gain, avoiding unpleasant duties).

⚫ Symptoms are intentionally produced or feigned.
⚫ False information is given intentionally
⚫ The   self-injurious behaviors or simulated somatic
  complaints are done consciously (i.e. assume a sick role
  to obtain the caring that comes with medical treatment).
⚫ Factitious illness by proxy
               Malingering
⚫ In  malingering, the patient has intentional and
  obvious goals, such as financial compensation or
  avoidance of duty or school, evasion of criminal
  prosecution, or obtaining of drugs.
⚫ The distinguishing feature being the conscious
  intent in the production of the symptoms

⚫ Intentional
⚫ External incentive
⚫ Medicolegal population
⚫ Forensic population
⚫ Not a mental illness
   Obstacles of treatment
Treatment of somatizing patients often
follows a similar sequence:
    ➢an expensive workup,
    ➢no biomedical diagnosis,
    ➢wear and tear on the clinician,
    ➢and frustration for the patient

The cost of treating a patient who has a
somatization disorder is nine times that of
treating a patient who does not have one
      'Sicker than the sick'
These patients believe they are "sicker
than the sick," despite physicians' best
efforts to alleviate their symptoms

Patients have poorer health than those
with other chronic medical conditions

They rarely respond to treatment, and if
they do, their response is short-lived.
   “A reluctance to change”
Patients with somatization disorder often
challenge suggestions and somatize every
treatments

They dramatically increase or decrease the
recommended dose on their own

They are rarely complete adequate trial of
any medication

They exhaust the therapeutic repertoire of
one physician and move on to the next
  “Caring rather than curing”
The more the physician tries to do, the more
symptoms the patient acquires

Clinicians may be demoralized by patients'
unending physical concerns, the inability to find a
cure, and complaints that not enough is being
done.

Physicians need to realize that further attempts to
treat patients who are reluctant to change will be
counterproductive.

"You can lead a horse to water, but if you try to carry that
       horse across, you are both going to drown."
  “The wisdom of doing less”
Sometimes doing less may be the most
effective strategy



Instead of offering treatments to the
patient, it may simply important to listen
                 General Principles
   “Never do harm" Hippocratic Oath
   Management of the somatizing patient is best done
   by a single clinician
````Referrals should be used sparingly, as they add the impression that the
    problem is both physical and severe
   Regular, brief visits
````Minimize patients' need to develop more new symptoms in order to
    receive care& reminds the patient of the physician's availability and
    concern
   Look for signs of disease rather than being symptom
   focused
   Understand symptoms as emotional communication
   rather than disease
          General Principles (cont.)
   Although physical illness must be ruled out, the
   workup should be limited
````Avoids unnecessary investigations and treatment
````Avoid reinforcing the idea that the problem is only physical
   Discuss the diagnosis cautiously
````Telling a somatizing patient that “it’s all in your head” is not at all useful
   Decreases the stigma attached to a psychogenic
   etiology
   Remember that they “somatize” rather than
   “psychologize.”
   Aim for alliance and reassurance;
```` Do not insist that the patient see their case at first as “psychological.”
````It may well take a while before the patient is willing to consider the
    possibility of psychological factors
        Pharmacotherapy
The use of placebo is not a useful
technique for long-term help in these
patients.
ThankYou
