SOURCE: Semester 8\Neuro\Theoritical\PPT\L6) Peripheral neuropathy.pdf

‫بسم هللا الرحمن‬
   ‫الرحيم‬
Peripheral Neuropathies
DR Doaa Elsalamawy
Professor of neuropsychiatry
Faculty of medicine Alexandria
university

    Doaa.Elsalamawy@gmail.com
ILOs:
By the end of this session, the students
should be able to:
-Identify different types of peripheral
neuropathy.
-Understands clinical picture of
Gullian Barre syndrome
-know possible causes of Gullian Barre
-Discuss diagnosis and managements
This Photo by Unknown Author is licensed under CC BY
• Peripheral neuropathy and polyneuropathy
• terms that describe syndromes resulting from
    diffuse lesions of peripheral nerves, usually
    manifested by weakness, sensory loss, pain, and
    autonomic dysfunction.
• Mononeuropathy
• indicates a disorder of a single nerve.
 Mononeuropathy multiplex signifies focal
    involvement of two or more nerves.
•
• Symptoms and signs
• Symptoms of polyneuropathy include acral (distal)
 pain, paresthesias, weakness, and sensory loss and may
 be sharp or burning. Paresthesias are usually described
 as numbness tingling, buzzing, stinging, burning. Lack
 of pain perception may result in repeated traumatic
 injuries with degeneration of joints (arthropathy or
 Charcot joints).
• Weakness is greatest in distal limb
 muscles in most neuropathies;
• there may be paralysis of the intrinsic
 foot and hand muscles with foot drop or
 wrist-drop.
• Tendon reflexes are often lost, especially
 in demyelinating neuropathy
•      In severe polyneuropathy, the patient
    may become quadriplegic and respirator
    dependent. The cranial nerves may be
    affected, particularly in GBS and
    diphtheritic neuropathy. Cutaneous
    sensory loss appears in a stocking and
    glove distribution. All modes of sensation
    may be affected.
• Involvement of autonomic nerves
 may cause miosis (small pupil), Adie
 pupils, anhidrosis (impaired sweating),
 orthostatic hypotension, sphincter
 disturbance, GI dysmotility,
 impotence, and vasomotor
 abnormalities.
• Table (1): Neuropathy
Diagnosis and Laboratory
         Tests*.
 Cause or Diagnosis       Manifestations     Laboratory Tests

Vitamin               S, SM, SYM           Vitamins           B12,
deficiency/excess                          pyridoxine (B6), B1,
                                           folate,  vitamin    E,
                                           methylmalonic acid
Infectious

Lyme disease          S, SM, SYM, MF,CN    Serology, PCR

HIV-1                 S, SM, SYM, MF,CN    Serology, PCR

Hepatitis C           S, SM, SYM, MF,CN    Serology, PCR

Herpes zoster         S, radicular         Serology, PCR

CMV                   S, SM, SYM, MF       Serology, PCR, culture
Immune mediated


Guillain-Barre` and variants   SM,S,M,SYM,MF,CN        IgG anti-ganglioside antibodies
                                                       (GM-1,GD1a, GQ1b, GD1b),
                                                       urine porphyrins
IgM antibody associated        M,MF                    IgM anti-GM-1, GD1a
                               S,SM,SYM                IgM anti-MAG, sulfatide,
                                                       GD1b, GQ1b
Monoclonal gammopathy          M,S, SM, SYM, MF        Serum            immunofixation
                                                       electrophoresis,    quantitative
                                                       immunoglobulins
Autonomic neuropathy           Autonomic dysfunction   Anti-nicotinic     acetylcholine
                                                       receptor antibodies, anti-HU
Vasculitis                     SM, S, MF,SYM           ESR, cryoglobulins, hepatitis C
                                                       serology, or PCR
Sarcoidosis                    SM, S, MF,SYM           ACE, chest radiograph


Celiac disease                 S, SM, MF,SYM           Antigliadin,       endomysial,
                                                       transglutaminase antibodies
Rheumatologic diseases         SM, S, MF,SYM           SSA-Ro, SSB-La antibodies
 Sjogren syndrome                                      ANA,      ANCA         (PR3,
 Lupus                                                 myeloperoxidase), dsDNA, Ab,
 Wegener granulomatosis                                RNP, rheumatoid factor
 Rheumatoid arthritis
 Paraneoplastic




 Lung cancer      S,SYM             Anti-Hu Ab,      chest
                                    radiograph/CT



 Waldenstrom      SM, S, M,SYM,MF   Serum immunofixation
syndrome                            electrophoresis



Myeloma           SM, M, SYM,MF     Serum      and   urine
                                    immunofixation
                                    electrophoresis,
                                    skeletal survey
Hereditary

CMT-1           Demyelinating,          DNA tests for PMP-
                SM,SYM,MF               22,   MPZ,   EGR2,
                                        Cx32, others

CMT-2           Axonal, SM, SYM         DNA tests for NF-L,
                                        Cx32, MPZ, others


Mitochondrial   NARP, SM, MF            Serum         lactate,
                                        thymidine
                                        phosphorylase, DNA
                                        testing
Other           Axonal     S,      SM, DNA        tests     for
                amyloid, porphyria     transthyretin, periaxin,
                                       urine porphyrins
 Metabolic/toxic


 Diabetes          S,  SM,      SYM, Fasting      glucose,
                   MF,CN             HgbA1c,       glucose
                                     tolerance test

 Renal failure     S, SM, SYM         Chem 7


 Thyroid disease   S, SM, SYM, MF     TSH, T4


 Heavy metal       S, SM, SYM, MF     Urine          lead,
toxicity                              mercury,    arsenic,
                                      thallium
• *CN, cranial nerves; Cx32, connexin; EGR, early
    growth response protein; GM-1, GD1a, ganglioside
    components of myelin; M, motor; MF, multifocal;
    MPZ, myelin protein zero; NARP, neuropathy, ataxia,
    retinitis pigmentosa; NF-Lneurofilament light chain;
    PCR, polymerase chain reaction; PMP, peripheral myelin
    protein, RNP, ribonudeoprotein; S, sensory; SM,
    sensorimotor; SSA, SSB, antigens for Sjogren syndrome
    severe antibodies; SYM, symmetric.
•
• Superficial cutaneous nerves may be
 thickened and visibly enlarged secondary
 to Schwann cell
 proliferation.Hypertrophic nerves may be
 observed or palpated in the demyelinating.


• Fasciculations, or spontaneous
 contractions of individual motor units, are
 visible twitches of limb or cranial muscles.
• Etiology and diagnosis
• Peripheral nerve disorders may be divided into
    hereditary and acquired forms. The most
    common hereditary disorder is CMT. The most
    commonly acquired neuropathies in the United
    States are associated with diabetes mellitus;
    selected other causes of polyneuropathy are listed
    in table (1).
•
• Trauma, compression, and entrapment are
 considered in the differential diagnosis of
 mononeuropathies, especially median
 neuropathy at the wrist, ulnar nerve at the
 elbow, or peroneal nerve across the fibular
 head. Patients with any form of
 polyneuropathy are more vulnerable to
 mechanical and toxic nerve injury; cachectic or
 immobile patents may develop focal
 neuropathy from pressure or trauma.
• In the evaluation of a patient with
 peripheral neuropathy, a detailed family,
 social, and medical and medication history;
 neurologic examination; and
 electrodiagnostic and laboratory testing are
 usually necessary for diagnosis.
Treatment
  Treatment of patients with peripheral
nerve disorders can be divided into two
phases: removal or treatment of the
inciting condition     and symptomatic
therapy. Specific treatments are
considered in discussions of individual
disorders.
• Symptomatic treatment of polyneuropathy
    consists of general supportive measures,
    amelioration of pain, and physiotherapy.
    Tracheal intubation and respiratory support
    may be needed in GBS. The bed is kept clean
    and the sheets are kept smooth to prevent
    injury to the anesthetic skin. Paralyzed limbs
    are splinted to prevent contractures. Physical
    therapy includes massage and passive joint
    movement.
•
• Guliiain-Barre' syndrome
• The Guliiain-Barre' syndrome (GBS) is
    characterized by acute onset of peripheral and
    cranial nerve dysfunction. viral respiratory or
    gastrointestinal infection, immunization, or
    surgery often precedes neurologic symptoms by 5
    days to 4 weeks. Symptoms and signs include
    rapidly progressive symmetric weakness, loss of
    tendon reflexes, facial diplegia, oropharyngeal and
    respiratory paresis, and impaired sensation in the
    hands and feet.
•
• The condition worsens for several days
 to 3 weeks, followed by a period of
 stability and then gradual improvement to
 normal or nearly normal function. Early
 plasmapheresis or IVIG accelerates
 recovery and diminishes the incidence of
 long-term neurologic disability.
• Etiology
• There is evidence that it is immune
 mediated. There is inflammatory pathology
 and patients improve with
 immunomodulatory therapy. An important
 first step in autoimmune disease is the
 impairment of self-tolerance, and there is
 evidence that this occurs by molecular
 mimicry with cross-reactive epitopes between
 Campylobacter jejuni and peripheral nerve.
• Electrophysiology and Pathology
• Nerve conduction velocities are reduced in
 GBS. Histologically, GBS is characterized by
 focal segmental demyelination with
 perivascular and endoneurial infiltrates of
 lymphocytes and monocytes or macrophages.
 These lesions are scattered throughout the
 nerves, nerve roots, and cranial nerves. In
 particularly severe lesions, there is both axonal
 degeneration and segmental demyelination.
This Photo by Unknown Author is licensed under CC BY-SA-NC
• Fig. ( 1): Diffuse mononuclear infiltrate in
           peripheral nerve in GBS
• Fig. ( ): Wallerian degeneration. After axotomy, the axon
  and myelin sheath distal to the transaction begin to
  degenerate. Within a few days, macrophages are recruited
  into the injury site and digest the debris. Changes also
  occur proximal to the site of injury. A degree of wallerian
  degeneration takes place up to the first encountered node
  of Ranvier, and the cell body undergoes chromatolysis,
  which represents a switch in function of the cell body
  from axon maintenance to axon regeneration. If
  regeneration does not take place, the target tissue is not
  reinnervated, and degeneration of the target organ
  eventually occurs.
    Incidence

• GBS is the most frequently acquired
    demyelinating neuropathy. The
    incidence increases gradually with age,
    but the disease may occur at any age.
    Men and women are affected equally.
•
• Symptoms and Signs
• GBS often appears days to weeks
 after symptoms of a viral upper
 respiratory or gastrointestinal
 infection, symmetric limb weakness,
 often with paresthesia.
• In contrast to most other
 neuropathies, proximal muscles are
 sometimes initially affected more than
 distal muscles. Occasionally, facial,
 ocular, or oropharyngeal muscles are
 affected first; more than 50% of
 patients have facial diplegia, dysphagia
 and dysarthria.
• Some patients require mechanical ventilation. Tendo
 reflexes are lost. The degree of sensory impairment
 varies. Diminution is perception of joint position,
 vibration, pain, and temperature in stocking-and-glov
 distribution. Autonomic dysfunction, including
 orthostatic hypotension, labile blood pressure,
 tachyarrhythmia, frequent in more severe cases and an
 important cause of morbidity and mortality
• Diagnosis and differential diagnosis
• The characteristic history of subacute
    development of symmetric motor or
    sensorimotor neuropathy after a viral illness,
    delivery, or surgery, together with
    compatible electrophysiology and an
    elevated CSF protein content with normal
    cell count, defines GBS.
•
•
•      Differential diagnosis:
• Diphtheritic polyneuropathy ,
 acute poliomyelitis, toxic
 neuropathies: arsenic ingestion and
 lead poising,tick paralysis.
• Treatment
• Early plasmapheresis or IVIG
 therapy has proved useful in
 patients with GBS. Mechanically
 assisted ventilation is sometimes
 necessary. Exposure keratitis must
 be prevented in patients with facial
 diplegia.
• Diabetic neuropathy
• Peripheral neuropathy occurs in
    approximately 50% of patients with
    diabetes mellitus, most commonly as a
    distal symmetric neuropathy. Painful
    neuropathies, mononeuropathies, and
    radiculopathies with a disabling and
    continuous pain, often a burning sensation
    in a stocking distribution.

•
• Sensorimotor polyneuropathies with
 or without autonomic symptoms and
 signs. Although the progressive
 symmetric polyneuropathy is probably
 owing to microvascular disease,
 resulting from hyperglycemia.
This Photo by Unknown Author is licensed under CC BY-SA
