SOURCE: Semester 8\Neuro\Theoritical\PPT\L8) Cranial nerves.pdf

Cranial nerves
 Prepared by Dr Mervat Hamed
 A.Professor of Neuropsychiatry
     Alexandria University
4 Cranial nerves are nerves that emerge
  directly from the brain, in contrast to spinal
  nerves which emerge from segments of the
  spinal cord.
4 In humans, there are 12 pairs of cranial
  nerves. Only the first and the second pair
  emerge from the cerebrum; the remaining
  10 pairs emerge from the brainstem.
Olfactory nerve
4 The olfactory nerve, or cranial nerve I, is
  the first of twelve cranial nerves.
4 It is instrumental in the sense of smell.
4 It is the shortest of the twelve cranial
  nerves.
4 The specialized olfactory receptor neurons
  of the olfactory nerve are located in the
  olfactory mucosa of the upper parts of the
  nasal cavity.
4 To test the function of the olfactory nerve, block one of the
  patient's nostrils and place a pungent non-irritant odor
  (such as damp coffee essence or orange seeds) under the
  open nostril. The test is then repeated on the other nostril.
4 Intensely smelling substances, for example ammonia, may
  lead to the activation of pain receptors (nociceptors) of the
  trigeminal nerve that are located in the nasal cavity and
  this can confound olfactory testing
   Causes of anosmia
4 There are many potential causes of anosmia including:
4 Mucous blockage of the nose: preventing oduors
  from reaching the olfactory nerve receptors.
4 Head trauma: can result in shearing of the olfactory
  nerve fibers leading to anosmia.
4 Genetics: some individuals have congenital anosmia.
4 Parkinson’s disease: anosmia is an early feature
  of Parkinson’s disease.
4 COVID-19: transient anosmia is a common feature
  of COVID-19.
Optic nerve (II)

 The optic nerve, cranial nerve II, transmits
  visual information from the retina to the brain.
 The optic nerve is the second of twelve paired
  cranial nerves but is considered to be part of
  the central nervous system as it is derived from
  an outpouching of the diencephalon during
  embryonic development.
Test
 Examine Visual acuity: with patient wearing
  glasses, test each eye separately on eye chart/ card
  using an eye cover.
 Examine visual fields by confrontation method.
  Keep examiner's head level with patient's head.
 If poor visual acuity, using flash light.
 Fundoscopy: Offer to examine the back of the eye
  with an ophthalmoscope to check for swelling of
  the optic disc (papilledema), which can indicate
  increased intracranial pressure.
  Examine pupil
 Assess pupil size:
 Normal pupil size varies between individuals and depends on
  lighting conditions (i.e. smaller in bright light, larger in the
  dark).
 Pupils are usually smaller in infancy and larger in adolescence.
 Assess pupil shape:
 Pupils should be round, abnormal shapes can be congenital or
  due to pathology (e.g. posterior synechiae associated with
  uveitis).
 Assess pupil symmetry: Note any asymmetry in pupil size
  between the pupils (anisocoria).
 Pupillary reflexes
 Direct pupillary reflex
 Assess the direct pupillary reflex:
 Shine the light from your pen torch into the
  patient’s pupil and observe for pupillary
  restriction in the ipsilateral eye.
 A normal direct pupillary reflex involves
  constriction of the pupil that the light is being
  shone into.
 Consensual pupillary reflex:
 Once again shine the light from your pen torch
  into the same pupil, but this time observe for
  pupillary restriction in the contralateral eye.
 A normal consensual pupillary reflex involves
  the contralateral pupil constricting as a response
  to light entering the eye being tested.
  Examine pupil
 Assess pupil size:
 Normal pupil size varies between individuals and depends on
  lighting conditions (i.e. smaller in bright light, larger in the
  dark).
 Pupils are usually smaller in infancy and larger in adolescence.
 Assess pupil shape:
 Pupils should be round, abnormal shapes can be congenital or
  due to pathology (e.g. posterior synechiae associated with
  uveitis).
 Assess pupil symmetry: Note any asymmetry in pupil size
  between the pupils (anisocoria).
  Examine pupil
 Assess pupil size:
 Normal pupil size varies between individuals and depends on
  lighting conditions (i.e. smaller in bright light, larger in the
  dark).
 Pupils are usually smaller in infancy and larger in adolescence.
 Assess pupil shape:
 Pupils should be round, abnormal shapes can be congenital or
  due to pathology (e.g. posterior synechiae associated with
  uveitis).
 Assess pupil symmetry: Note any asymmetry in pupil size
  between the pupils (anisocoria).
 Accommodation reflex
 1. Ask the patient to focus on a distant
  object (clock on the wall/light switch).
 2. Place your finger approximately 20-30cm
  in front of their eyes (alternatively, use the
  patient’s own thumb).
 3. Ask the patient to switch from looking at
  the distant object to the nearby finger/thumb
 4. Observe the pupils, you should see
  constriction and convergence bilaterally.
 Accommodation reflex
 1. Ask the patient to focus on a distant
  object (clock on the wall/light switch).
 2. Place your finger approximately 20-30cm
  in front of their eyes (alternatively, use the
  patient’s own thumb).
 3. Ask the patient to switch from looking at
  the distant object to the nearby finger/thumb
 4. Observe the pupils, you should see
  constriction and convergence bilaterally.
Test
 With patient wearing glasses, test each eye
  separately on eye chart/ card using an eye cover.
 Examine visual fields by confrontation method.
  Keep examiner's head level with patient's head.
 If poor visual acuity, using flash light.
 Fundus examination
Oculomotor nerve (III)
 The oculomotor nerve controls most of the
  eye's movement, constriction of the pupil,
  and maintains an open eyelid.
 Fourth and Sixth nerve supply trochlear and
  lateral rectus respectively.
 Cranial nerves III, IV and VI are usually tested
  together.
 The examiner typically instructs the patient to hold
  his head still and follow only with the eyes a finger
  or penlight that circumscribes a large "H" in front of
  the patient.
 By observing the eye movement and eyelids, the
  examiner is able to obtain more information about
  the extraocular muscles, the levator palpebrae
  superioris muscle, and cranial nerves III, IV, and VI.
 The oculomotor nerve also controls the
  constriction of the pupils and thickening of
  the lens of the eye.
 This can be tested in two main ways.
 By moving a finger towards a person's face
  to induce accommodation, as well as them
  going cross-eyed, their pupils should
  constrict.
Trochlear nerve (IV)

 The trochlear nerve is a motor nerve (a
  “somatic efferent” nerve) that innervates a
  single muscle: the superior oblique muscle
  of the eye.
Abducens nerve (VI)
 The abducens nerve or abducent nerve (is a “somatic
  efferent” nerve that controls the movement of a single
  muscle, the lateral rectus muscle of the eye.
 Because the nerve emerges near the bottom of the brain, it
  is often the first nerve compressed when there is any rise
  in intracranial pressure. Different presentations of the
  condition, or associations with other conditions, can help
  to localize the site of the lesion along the VI th cranial
  nerve pathway.
Causes of VI nerve palsy
 The most common causes of VI th nerve palsy in adults
are:
 More common: Vasculopathic
(diabetes, hypertension, atherosclerosis), trauma, idiopathic.
 Less common: Increased intracranial pressure, giant cell
arteritis, cavernous sinus mass (e.g. meningioma, Brain
stem Glioblastoma, aneurysm, metastasis), multiple
sclerosis, sarcoidosis/vasculitis, postmyelography, lumbar
puncture, stroke (usually not isolated),
  Chiari Malformation, hydrocephalus, intracranial
hypertension and tuberculosis meningitis.
Management

 The first aim of management should be to identify and
treat the cause of the condition, where this is possible, and to
relieve the patient's symptoms, where present.
 In children, who rarely appreciate diplopia, the aim will be
to maintain binocular vision and, thus, promote proper visual
development.
 Treatment therapies in children include alternate patching,
prism therapy, and strabismus surgery.
Management

 The first aim of management should be to identify and
treat the cause of the condition, where this is possible, and to
relieve the patient's symptoms, where present.
 In children, who rarely appreciate diplopia, the aim will be
to maintain binocular vision and, thus, promote proper visual
development.
 Treatment therapies in children include alternate patching,
prism therapy, and strabismus surgery.
Trigeminal nerve (V)

 The trigeminal nerve is responsible for
  sensation in the face. Sensory information
  from the face and body is processed by
  parallel pathways in the central nervous
  system. The motor function activates the
  muscles of mastication, the tensor tympani,
  tensor veli palatini, mylohyoid, and anterior
  belly of the digastric.
Sensory branches
File:Trig innervation.svg
 Motor branches of the trigeminal nerve are
  distributed in the mandibular nerve. These fibers
  originate in the motor nucleus of the fifth nerve,
  which is located near the main trigeminal nucleus in
  the pons.
 Muscles of mastication
 masseter
 temporalis
 medial pterygoid
 lateral pterygoid
 Corneal reflex: patient looks up and away.
  • Touch cotton wool to other side.
  • Look for blink in both eyes, ask if can sense it.
  • Repeat other side [tests V sensory, VII motor].
 Facial sensation: sterile sharp item on forehead, cheek,
  jaw.
  • Repeat with dull object. Ask to report sharp or dull.
  • If abnormal, then temperature [heated/ water-cooled
  tuning fork], light touch [cotton].
 Motor: pt opens mouth, clenches teeth (pterygoids).
  • Palpate temporal, masseter muscles as they clench.
 Test jaw jerk:
   – Dr's finger on tip of jaw.
   – Grip patellar hammer halfway up shaft and tap Dr's
     finger lightly.
   – Usually nothing happens, or just a slight closure.
   – If increased closure, think UMNL, esp pseudobulbar
     palsy.
TRIGEMINAL NEURALGIA
 Trigeminal neuralgia (TN) is one of the most
common causes of facial pain.
 EPIDEMIOLOGY
✓ TN is one of the most frequently seen neuralgias
  in the elderly.
✓ It usually starts between the ages of 50 and 60.
✓ Women tend to be affected more than men.
ETIOLOGY
   TN is divided by etiology into classic and secondary
categories by the International Headache Society (IHS)
criteria.
a) Classic TN includes idiopathic TN cases and those related
    to vascular compression. Compression by an aberrant loop
    of an artery or vein.
b) Secondary (or symptomatic) TN is reserved for patients
    with TN caused by structural lesions other than vascular
    compression e.g., multiple sclerosis, post-herpetic, and
    tumor.
Clinical features
TN is defined clinically by paroxysmal,
stereotyped attacks of usually intense,
sharp, superficial or stabbing pain,
unilateral in the distribution of one or more
branches of the fifth cranial (trigeminal)
nerve.
▪   The pain Occur in paroxysms
▪ The pain is often described as electric, shock-like
    or stabbing.
▪ Duration: several seconds, may occur repetitively.
    Some patients with longstanding TN may have
    continuous dull pain that is present between
    paroxysms of pain.
▪ TN is typically unilateral.
▪ The distribution of pain most often involves the V2 and/or
  V3 subdivisions of the trigeminal nerve.
▪ Trigger zones in the distribution of the affected nerve.

▪ Triggers of TN paroxysms include Lightly touching of this
  zones, chewing, talking, brushing teeth, cold air, smiling,
  and/or grimacing. Most often, the condition tends to wax
  and wane in severity and frequency of pain exacerbations
DIAGNOSIS
✓ The diagnosis of TN is based upon the
  characteristic clinical features.
✓ Neuroimaging; MRI and magnetic resonance
  angiography (MRA) may be useful for identifying
  vascular compression and other structural brain
  lesions.
TREATMENT
  Pharmacologic therapy is the initial treatment of classic
TN. Antiepileptic drugs starting by small dose and gradually
increase till the pain is controlled.
o Carbamazepine:
o Oxcarbazepine
o Gabapentin
o Pregabalin
✓ Antidepressants: Tricyclic antidepressants: amitriptyline –
  Selective serotonin-noradrenaline reuptake inhibitors;
  duloxetine
➢ Treatment of the cause in cases of
 secondary TN; e.g., multiple sclerosis,
 tumors.
➢ Surgery : Surgery is reserved for
 patients who are refractory to medical
 therapy.
 A 64years old female presenting with acute attacks of pain
  in the Lt side of the face,electric like of few seconds
  duration ,attacks are very frequent 10-30 attacks /day
 What is the possible diagnosis:
 A) Atypical migraine
 B) Temporal arteritis
 C) Trigeminal neuralgia
 D)Glossopharyngeal neuralgia
 Facial nerve (VII)
 The facial nerve emerges from the brainstem
  between the pons and the medulla, and controls
  the muscles of facial expression, and functions in
  the conveyance of taste sensations from the
  anterior two-thirds of the tongue and oral cavity.
 It also supplies preganglionic parasympathetic
  fibers to several head and neck ganglia.
Branches
 Greater petrosal nerve - provides parasympathetic
  innervation to lacrimal gland, sphenoid sinus, frontal sinus,
  maxillary sinus, ethmoid sinus, nasal cavity, as well as
  special sensory taste fibers to the palate via the Vidian
  nerve.
 Nerve to stapedius - provides motor innervation for
  stapedius muscle in middle ear
 Chorda tympani - provides parasympathetic innervation to
  submandibular gland and sublingual gland and special
  sensory taste fibers for the anterior 2/3 of the tongue.
 Inspect facial droop or asymmetry.
 Facial expression muscles: pt looks up and wrinkles
  forehead.
  • Examine wrinkling loss.
  • Feel muscle strength by pushing down on each side
  [UMNL preserved because of bilateral innervation].
 Pt shuts eyes tightly: compare each side.
 Pt grins: compare nasolabial grooves.
 Also: frown, show teeth, puff out cheeks.
 Corneal reflex as facial is the efferent.
UMNF
 UMNL:
 Lesion in corticobulbar pathway till above level of pons.
 Spared upper face, only lower face affected.
 Deviation of mouth toward healthy side.
• Emotional expression lead to improvement of the deviation
  of the mouth
• If associated with hemiparesis, the hemiparesis will be on
  the same side of facial weakness
LMNF
 LMNL;
 Lesion from nucleus in the pons till the
  facial muscles.
 Upper and lower face are affected.
 Emotion increase mouth deviation
 If associated with hemiparesis, the
  hemiparesis will be on the opposite side to
  the facial weakness (crossed hemiplegia)
     UMN facial palsy
 1) Cortical lesion:
 • Jacksonian motor fits over the face
 • ± aphasia
 2) Subcortical lesion:
 • No seizures or aphasia
 • Monoparesis
 3) Capsular:
 • Complete hemiplegia on the same side
LMN facial:
1) Pontine lesion (e.g. vascular)
•   Hemiplegia (UMN) on the contralateral side of facial = crossed
    hemiplegia
•   Other cranial nerve may be involved as 6th nerve
1) At Cerebello-pontine angle (e.g. tumor)
•   7th + 8th → deafness (perceptive)
1) In the facial canal: (cholesteatoma, acoustic neuroma, otitis media)
 Loss of lacrimation (Dry eye)
 Lost taste sensation of anterior 2/3 of the tongue [if lesion before the
    joining of the chorda] •
 Hyperacusis (loud voice intolerance)
4)At stylomastoid (e.g. Bell’s palsy, mastoiditis)
•     Facial LMN only
•     Retro auricular pain
5) Outside the stylomastoid (e.g. parotid tumor or
surgery, trauma)
•     Partial LMN affection of the face; eyes only,
mouth only
Bell’s palsy
 Acute onset, unilateral
 Approximately 60% of patients have a
preceding viral illness. Numbness or pain in
front or behind the ear is present in about 50%
of patients. 25% have impaired taste
perception, 10% there is loss or significant
decrease of ipsilateral tearing.
     Recurrent Bell’s palsy is uncommon
 Impairment of voluntary movement of facial and
  platysma muscles, facial muscles pulled to the
  opposite side on smiling, saliva and food collected
  on the paralyzed side, and on attempting to close
  the eye the eyeball is diverted upward and inward
  (Bell phenomenon)
 No evidence of disease of the central nervous
  system, ear, or posterior fossa.
 The history should include a careful assessment of
  the following:
 Recent accident or blow to the head, recent viral
  infections, pain behind the ear, recent
  immunizations, e.g., influenza
 Change in auditory acuity, vertigo, change in taste,
 Past and present history of malignancies, HIV.
Etiology
 The main etiologic agent is a herpes simplex
virus-1 infection.
 Differential diagnosis
    Other causes of the LMN facial palsy and :
❖ Infections of the middle ear, or mastoid;
    cholesteatoma
 Diabetes mellitus
Diagnostic workup
 Electrophysiological studies. Nerve
  conduction and electromyogram; blink
  reflex. To assess prognosis and recovery
 Radiographic imaging; CT and MRI to
  detect any lesion causing LMN facial palsy
 laboratory tests; CBC – Fasting and
  postprandial blood sugar, ESR
Prognosis and complications
 Full recovery occurs in most of the patients. Recovery
  usually occurs in 4 months to 6 months.
 Early complication is related to the eye; conjunctivitis,
  keratitis and exposure corneal ulcer. [most dangerous
  complication]
 Late complications. Contracture is the most common late
  complication; may require plastic surgical correction if
  severe.
 Gustatory, or crocodile, tearing in which there is aberrant
  regeneration of secretory fibers to the lacrimal glands
  resulting in tearing during eating.
 Facial myokemia or hemifacial spasm
Management
 Eye care. This is the primary concern in Bell palsy.
  Lubricating eye drops during the day and an ointment-like
  petrolatum at night are usually effective.
 Prednisone. Only given within the first 5 days at a dose
  of 1 mg/kg prednisone per day (up to 60 mg) for 7 days
  then gradual withdrawal.
 Acyclovir; May be of value in the early stages of Bell
  palsy.
 Physiotherapy is very important to keep facial muscles
  function
 Most dangerous complication of bells palsy:
 A)Delayed recovery
 B) Faulty reinnervation
 C) Corneal ulcer
 D) Residual facial weakness
Vestibulocochlear nerve (VIII)

 The vestibulocochlear nerve is responsible
  for transmitting sound and equilibrium
  (balance) information from the inner ear to
  the brain. It consists of the cochlear nerve,
  carrying information about hearing, and the
  vestibular nerve, carrying information about
  balance.
Test :
 Dr's hands arms length by each ear of pt.
  • Rub one hand's fingers with noise on one side, other hand
  noiselessly.
  • Ask pt. which ear they hear you rubbing.
  • Repeat with louder intensity, watching for abnormality.
 Weber's test: Lateralization
  • 512/ 1024 Hz [256 if deaf] vibrating fork on top of
  patients head/ forehead.
  • "Where do you hear sound coming from?"
  • Normal reply is midline.
 Rinne's test: Air vs. Bone Conduction
  • 512/ 1024 Hz [256 if deaf] vibrating fork
  on mastoid behind ear. Ask when stop
  hearing it.
  • When stop hearing it, move to the patient's
  ear so can hear it.
  • Normal: air conduction [ear] better than
  bone conduction [mastoid].
 If indicated, look at external auditory
  canals, eardrums.
Glossopharyngeal nerve IX

 The glossopharyngeal nerve exits the
 brainstem out from the sides of the upper
 medulla, just rostral (closer to the nose) to
 the vagus nerve.
Testing the glossopharyngeal
nerve IX
 The integrity of the glossopharyngeal nerve may
  be evaluated by testing the patient's general
  sensation and that of taste on the posterior third of
  the tongue. The gag reflex can also be used to
  evaluate the glossphyaryngeal nerve, but also tests
  the vagus nerve, as only the afferent fibres
  involved in the reflex are carried by the
  glossopharyngeal nerve.
Test :
 Voice: hoarse or nasal.
 Pt. swallows, coughs (bovine cough: recurrent
  laryngeal).
 Examine palate for uvular displacement.
  (unilateral lesion: uvula drawn to normal side).
 Pt says "Ah": symmetrical soft palate movement.
 Gag reflex [sensory IX, motor X]:
  • Stimulate back of throat each side.
  • Normal to gag each time.
Vagus nerve X
 leaving the medulla between the olivary nucleus
  and the inferior cerebellar peduncle, it extends
  through the jugular foramen, then passing into the
  carotid sheath between the internal carotid artery
  and the internal jugular vein down below the head,
  to the neck, chest and abdomen, where it
  contributes to the innervation of the viscera.
 The vagus nerve supplies motor
  parasympathetic fibers to all the organs
  except the suprarenal (adrenal) glands, from
  the neck down to the second segment of the
  transverse colon
 Test uvela is central and movable and Gag
  reflex
Spinal accessory nerve XI
 The spinal accessory nerve provides motor
  innervation from the central nervous system to
  two muscles of the neck:
 The sternocleidomastoid muscle and the trapezius
  muscle. The sternocleidomastoid muscle tilts and
  rotates the head, while the trapezius muscle has
  several actions on the scapula, including shoulder
  elevation and adduction of the scapula.
Test:
 From behind, examine for trapezius
  atrophy, asymmetry.
 Pt. shrugs shoulders (trapezius).
 Pt. turns head against resistance: watch,
  palpate SCM on opposite side
 Hypoglossal nerve XII
 It supplies motor fibres to all of the
  muscles of the tongue, except the
  palatoglossus muscle which is
  innervated by the vagus nerve (cranial
  nerve X) or, according to some
  classifications, by fibers from the
  glossopharyngeal nerve.
 To test the function of the nerve, a
  person is asked to poke out their
  tongue.
 If there is a loss of function on one side
  (unilateral paralysis) the tongue will
  deviate towards the affected side.
 The strength of the tongue can be
 tested by getting the person to poke the
 inside of their cheek, and feeling how
 strongly they can push a finger pushed
 against their cheek - a more elegant
 way of testing than directly touching
 the tongue.
 The tongue can also be looked at for signs of
  lower motor neuron disease, such as fasciculation
  and wasting.
 Paralysis/paresis of one side of the tongue results
  in ipsilateral curvature of the tongue (apex toward
  the impaired side of the mouth) i.e., the tongue
  will move towards the affected side.
 Also look at if there is any involuntary movement
  like tremor and chorea
Tounge examination
 In a patient with lt UMNF, on examination of the
  corneal reflex on the Rt side (touching the Rt
  cornea with a whisper of cotton)will produce:
 A) Blinking in both eyes
 B) No blink in either eyes
 C)Blink on Rt side only
 D)Blink on the lt side only
 Which of the following muscles is not
  innervated by the oculomotor nerve?
 a) Superior rectus
 B) Inferior rectus
 C) lateral rectus
 D)inferior oblique
 Which of the following cranial nerves would most
  likely be affected in a patient presenting to you
  with papilledema, headache and significant
  obstructive hydrocephalus:
 A) facial nerve
 B) trochlear nerve
 C) abducens nerve
 D) trigeminal nerve
