SOURCE: Semester 8\Neuro\Theoritical\PPT\L9) CNS infection.pdf

CNS INFECTIONS                             Personal Photo




                  DR Doaa Elsalamawy
             Professor of neuropsychiatry
       Faculty of medicine Alexandria university

   Email Doaa.Elsalamawy@gmail.com
ILOs:
By the end of this session, the students should be able
to:
-Detect meningitis early
-Differentiate between different types of meningitis
-Investigate a case of meningitis and encephalitis
-know how to treat and prevent serious complications
.Clinical approach to “CNS infections”
Case 1
A 28-year-old man presents to the emergency room with a 48-
hour complaint of headache. The headache is primarily in the
frontal and occipital regions and associated with mild nausea. He
has taken various analgesics without any improvement in the
headache. The intensity of the headache has gradually increased
since it began prompting evaluation as he was no longer able to
tolerate it. His only other symptom besides nausea, is a tightness
in the shoulders and neck. He is not known to have any medical
illnesses, and there is no history of head trauma.
.Clinical approach to “CNS infections”

On examination, he has a temperature of 40°C; blood pressure,
110/68 mmHg; and pulse, of 110 beats/min. He is awake and
alert and fully oriented; however, he feels he is taking too much
time to answer the questions. His general examination is notable
for the finding of a Kernig sign without evidence of any skin rash.
A Brudzinski sign is present. Cranial nerves are normal except
for bilateral horizontal nystagmus. His motor, sensory, and
cerebellar examinations are normal.
.Clinical approach to “CNS infections”

The deep tendon reflexes are hyperreflexia throughout with
evidence of a Babinski sign. A CT scan of the head is performed
without contrast, which is read as normal. Importantly his
headache is worse now than what it was when he presented to
the emergency room.
◆ What is the most likely diagnosis?
◆ What is the best diagnostic next step?
◆ What is the next step in therapy?
Case analysis :
The presentation of a crescendo headache associated with
nausea, fever, and slowness in responding to questions should
alert the clinician of meningitis or encephalitis. It is also
suspected if the patient presented with a triad of headache,
fever and disturbed level f consciousness. The presence of neck
tightness and a Kernig sign is consistent with meningitis rather
than encephalitis.
The lumbar puncture CSF study is the best way to determine the
etiology of meningitis allowing one to distinguish between a
bacterial versus viral, and so forth. Although CSF studies are key
to identifying meningitis, an imaging study with either a CT head
scan or preferably MRI brain scan with contrast is preferably done
prior to the spinal tap.
• MRI brain scan offers better resolution than a CT head scan, but it
  may not always be ready available. The importance of the imaging
  studies is to help exclude increased intracranial pressure caused by
  impaired CSF drainage or a space-occupying lesion. Increased
  intracranial pressure could potentially lead to cerebral herniation and
  death of the patient.
Focal neurologic findings or the presence of papilledema
mandate an imaging study.

Once it is determined that the risk of herniation is low, a lumbar
puncture is performed. Lumbar puncture analysis should include
opening and closing pressure, and CSF studies for glucose,
protein, cell count with differential, Gram stain, culture.
CNS Infection
Meningitis and encephalitis are diffuse infection of the CNS.
Meningitis implies primary involvement of the meninges,
whereas encephalitis indicates brain parenchymal involvement.
Because these anatomic boundaries are often not distinct, many
patients have evidence of both meningeal and parenchymal
involvement and should be considered to have
meningoencephalitis.
BACTERIAL INFECTIONS
- Bacterial meningitis
- Tuberculosis
CNS Infection
VIRAL INFECTIONS
- Viral meningitis
- Herpes simplex encephalitis
Fungal infections
- Cryptococcal meningitis
Meningitis
1- Acute Bacterial Meningitis
2-Tuberculous Meningitis
3-Aseptic Meningitis
Acute Bacterial Meningitis
Epidemiology:
- Incidence: 5-10 cases / 100,000 population.
- Sex: Males are generally more affected than females.
- Age: according to the causative organism:
    H. Influenza, between 3 months and 7 years
Pneumococci: children and adult.
    Meningococci: children and adult, rarely seen above the age of 50.
- Season: Winter, Spring, and Fall
Acute Bacterial Meningitis
Causative Agent:
Streptococcus pneumoniaE, Neisseria meningitides, and H. Influenza are
responsible for 80% of cases.
 - Enterobacteria e.g. E. coli, Pseudomonas, Proteus, Klebsiella.
 - Group B Streptococci, Staph. Aureus, Listeria monocytogenes.
Route of entry:
A-Upper respiratory tract droplet infection
B- Hematogenous spread:
C- Extension from adjacent structures: Sinusitis, mastoiditis, ear infection.
D- Penetrating wounds, or iatrogenic during lumbar or brain surgery
Acute Bacterial Meningitis
Symptoms and signs:
- Fever, irritability, lethargy.
- Headache, vomiting, blurring of vision, photophobia,
- Neck rigidity
- positive Kernig sign, positive Brudzinski sign.
• Brudzinski sign
   • - Passive neck flex------hips & knees flex
   • Passive lower limb flex------hip, knee flexion other lower limb
. Kernig sign
     Sever stiffness of the hamstrings causes an inability to straighten
the leg when the hip is flexed to 90 degrees
Acute Bacterial Meningitis
Symptoms and signs:
- Convulsion,
- Disturbed state of consciousness: drowsiness, confusion,
delirium, stupor or coma.
- Purpuric rash, petechial hemorrhage, and ecchymosis [in
meningococcal meningitis]
- In infants and neonates, headache is not described and
   meningeal signs appear late and might not be evident.
- Bulging fontanels and sutures in neonates
Acute Bacterial Meningitis
Complications
- Focal neurological signs due to:
    - Todd's paralysis
    - Focal collection of exudates or brain abscess .
    - Vascular occlusion and infarction, cranial nerve
involvement.
- In severe infection leading to circulatory collapse
- Hydrocephalus
-Subdural empyema
Acute Bacterial Meningitis
Investigations:
Lumbar puncture & CSF examination prior to beginning
antibiotic therapy. Starting antibiotic should not be delayed for
culture and sensitivity
CT brain before LP if there is; signs of lateralization or deteriorating level
of consciousness
Contraindications to L.P.:
- Signs of possible herniation: Altered pupillary responses. New focal
neurologic deficits.
- Local skin infection over lumbar spine
Acute Bacterial Meningitis
• CSF ANALYSIS
 - Increased pressure
 - Increased cells, usually 1000-10,000/dl, mainly neutrophils
 - Increased protein, usually above 45 mg/dl (100-500 mg/dl)
 - Decreased sugar, less than 40 mg/dl, [or < 40% of blood sugar]
 - Gram staining
 - Culture and sensitivity test
Acute Bacterial Meningitis
Radiological investigations: CT and MRI brain in case of
lateralization or suspicious increase intracranial pressure.
Treatment
General principles.
    - Hospitalization:
    - The minimum duration of antibiotic therapy: At least 10
days from the start of treatment and at least 7 days after the
patient becomes afebrile.
Acute Bacterial Meningitis
Recommended Empiric Antibiotics for Suspected Bacterial
Meningitis,
Vancomycin + ceftriaxone By anti meningitic dose
Corticosteroids; dexamethasone inj. Decrease mortality and
sequelae.
Empirical treatment should be given until the results of CSF
culture and sensitivity is available and then give the specific
antibiotic.
• Prevention
• Chemoprophylaxis for contact with patient Ciprofloxacin 500mg single
  dose in adults, children could receive either single dose of ceftriaxone
  IM or 4 oral doses of rifampin
• Vccination
• Polysaccharide polyvalant vaccine against meningococcal meningitis
Tuberculous Meningitis
The incidence of TB meningitis has increased progressively since
1985. This is related mainly (but not exclusively) to the increased
incidence of HIV.

Clinical picture:
   - Headache, lethargy, vomiting, meningeal signs and seizures.
   - Unlike other bacterial meningitis, TB meningitis is
characterized by:
Tuberculous Meningitis
- Less rapid onset, over one or two weeks.
- More frequent involvement of cranial nerves, especially, 3rd,
4th, and 6th nerves, facial nerve and auditory nerve.
- Focal neurological signs are more common.
- Only two third of the patients have evidence of pulmonary TB
- TB toxemia loss of weight night sweating anorexia.
If left untreated, progressive deterioration of consciousness
occur, up to stupor and deep coma. Mortality in undiagnosed
case is nearly 100%.
Tuberculous Meningitis
Investigation
• CSF analysis
  - Increased pressure -Ground glass appearance
  - Increased cells,50-100/dl, mainly lymphocytes
  - Increased protein, (usually >500 mg/dl)
  - Decreased sugar
  - Decreased chloride
  - Zeihl- Neelsen staining
  - Culture
  - PCR
Tuberculous Meningitis

• CT scan and MRI brain:
 - Focal neurological granulomas
 - Tuberculomas
 - Hydrocephalus

• CBC, Serum electrolyte, renal and liver functions
Tuberculous Meningitis
Treatment:
  - A 2-month initiation phase with four drugs (rifampicin,
isoniazid, pyrazinamide and ethambutol) followed by a 10 – 12
month continuation phase of two drugs (rifampicin and
isoniazid)

 - Adjunctive corticosteroids appear to improve survival
Aseptic meningitis
The term aseptic meningitis is used to describe a syndrome with
the following criteria:
1 - Acute onset of meningeal symptoms and signs.
2 - CSF suggestive of meningitis, showing small or large number
of cells, mainly mononuclear cells and lymphocytes, increased
protein, and normal sugar.
3 - Absence of bacteria in CSF as demonstrated by culture.
4 - Relatively short, benign course of illness.
Encephalitis
Encephalitis is an inflammation of the brain, which is often the
result of an unusual complication from a common viral infection.
The most common viral encephalitis is herpes simplex
encephalitis.
Many viruses can affect the brain: e.g. Herpes simplex virus
[most common], Epstein-Barr virus, Cytomegalovirus….ect.
Herpes Simplex Encephalitis
- The commonest and gravest form of acute encephalitis.
- It is fatal in 30-70% of cases, and most survivors have sequalae.
- It is due to herpes simplex virus type 1 most common
- The brain gets affected via local spread from oropharyngeal
    infection to the brain via trigeminal or olfactory nerves, or
    possible viremia,
Clinical Picture Acute onset of headache, fever, confusion,
delirium, stupor and may proceed into coma. [Edema may cause
temporal lobe herniation leading to severe coma and death]
re
Clinical picture:
• Acute onset of headache, fever , confusion,delirium ,stupor ,may
  progress to coma, oedema may be sever causing temporal lobe
  herniation and death
Herpes Simplex Encephalitis
- Manifestation of temporal lobe insult including: complex
   partial seizures, psychotic or behavioral changes, olfactory
   and/or gustatory hallucination, dysphasia, hemiplegia.
- Memory change which is usually a late manifestation.
Investigations
- CSF: Increased pressure, increased protein, increased cells
(mainly lymphocytes), and normal sugar. HSV DNA can be
detected in the CSF by PCR assay, and this is the diagnostic test
of choice.
Herpes Simplex Encephalitis
- CT scan and MRI brain:
characteristically the lesion in the
inferior and medial portion of the temporal
lobe with scattered areas of hemorrhage
and surrounding edema.
- EEG: Periodic high voltage sharp
 waves and slow waves complexes in
the temporal area.
Herpes Simplex Encephalitis
Treatment
 - IV acyclovir (Zovirax): 10 mg/Kg/8 hrs for 2 weeks.
 - Corticosteroids may be used for acute edema.
Case 2 ( test yourself)
A 17 years old male was presented with fever, recurrent syncope
and seizures following tooth extraction. He attended to a
different clinic with the syncope and seizure symptoms on the
following day. As his clinical progression went worse, he was
transferred to the hospital for advanced diagnosis. He went into
status epilepticus (SE) three days after the extraction, on the day
we administered him to the ICU. His medical history was
unremarkable. His fever was 38.5°C with arterial tension 125/75
mmHg, heart rate 84/min, Kernig-Brundzki sign negative.
Case 2 ( test yourself)
Lumbar puncture results revealed insignificant cell count,
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) glucose: 72 mg/dl and protein: 35gr/dl. His
cranial MRI revealed findings concordant with left temporal lobe
encephalopathy. The seizures were controlled with anticonvulsive,
other medications and the patient was awake and cooperative. As
the general condition improved the patient was discharged from the
intensive care unit to the infectious diseases ward on the fourth day
of his admission.
• What is your provisional diagnosis ?
• How can you support your diagnosis ?
• What is the lines of treatment ?
Resources/References
Bradly's neurology in clinical practice
