SOURCE: Semester 8\Opthalmo\Theoritical\PPT\L23) Ocular manifestations of systemic diseases.pdf

Ocular manifestations of
  systemic diseases
              By
         Faten Hussein
Objectives
• Many systemic diseases have ocular signs and symptoms that
  may result in serious ocular sequelae, including diabetes mellitus,
  hypertension, sickle cell anemia, thyroid disease, sarcoidosis and
  other inflammatory and autoimmune conditions, malignancy,
  acquired immunodeficiency syndrome, syphilis, and other
  systemic infections and pregnancy are also noted.
Objectives
• To achieve this, you should:
• perform a thorough eye examination.
• recognize the characteristic features, especially the
  ophthalmoscopic features, of these diseases.
• determine when it is appropriate to refer a patient to an
  ophthalmologist for consultation or treatment
Diabetes Mellitus
• Diabetes mellitus may have various ocular complications
  including refractive changes and cataract formation, but the most
  important is retinopathy.
1. The longer a person suffers from diabetes, the greater the
    likelihood of developing diabetic retinopathy;The longer a
    person suffers from diabetes, the greater the likelihood of
    developing diabetic retinopathy,:
    -IDDM, type 1
    -NIDDM, type 2
Diabetes Mellitus
• 2-Glycemic control:
     - intensive glycemic control is associated with a reduced risk of
newly diagnosed retinopathy and reduced progression of existing
retinopathy in people with IDDM.
   - In NIDDM intensive glycemic control compared to conventional
treatment was associated with reduction in progression to severe
nonproliferative and proliferative retinopathy, a decreased
incidence of macular edema, and reduction in need for panretinal
and focal macular laser photocoagulation.
Diabetes Mellitus
 3- Hypertension:
       Tight control of BP is important in preventing the
development and progression of DR.
 4-Microvascular complications as neuropathy and nephropathy
can be lowered by tight glycemic control.
 5- Cardiovascular diseases are also related to advanced DR.
Stages of DR
• 1- NPDR:
         - Mild
         - Moderate
        - Severe
• 2- PDR
NPDR
       • Microaneurysms.
       • Blot&dot hemorrhage.
       • Hard exudates.
       • Retinal edema.
Sever NPDR
             • Soft(cotton wool) exudates.
             • Venous changes.
             • Areas of capillary closure.
             • Large hemorrhages.
             • IRMA
Signs of NPDR




           Microaneurysms usually         Intraretinal dot and
           temporal to fovea              blot haemorrhages




           Hard exudates frequently      Retinal oedema seen as
           arranged in clumps or rings   thickening on biomicroscopy
     Proliferative diabetic retinopathy

       • Affects 5-10% of diabetics
       • IDD at increased risk (60% after 30 years)

       Neovascularization
        • Flat or elevated
        • Severity determined by comparing with area of disc




Neovascularization of disc = NVD          Neovascularization elsewhere = NVE
                         Indications for treatment of proliferative
                                   diabetic retinopathy




NVD > 1/3 disc in area          Less extensive NVD               NVE > 1/2 disc in area
                                + haemorrhage                    + haemorrhage
             Diffuse diabetic maculopathy




• Diffuse retinal thickening                • Generalized leakage on FA
• Frequent cystoid macular oedema           • Grid photocoagulation
• Variable impairment of visual acuity      • Guarded prognosis
Hypertensive retinopathy
• Classifications:
• changes due to arteriolar sclerosis
• changes due to elevated blood pressure.
Arteriolar sclerosis
• Aging causes thickening and sclerosis of the arterioles.
• Prolonged systemic hypertension (usually diastolic pressure
  greater than 100 mm Hg) accelerates this process.
• The amount of arteriolar sclerosis depends on the duration and
  severity of the hypertension and may reflect the condition of the
  arterioles elsewhere in the body.
• In a normal eye, the retinal arterioles are transparent tubes with
  blood visible by ophthalmoscopy; a light streak is reflected from
  the convex wall of the arteriole.
Arteriolar sclerosis

                       • Ophthalmoscopic features of
                         retinal arteriolar sclerosis:
                       • an increase in the light reflex
                         of the arteriole.
                       • Copper wire.
                       • Silver wire
A/V Crossing Changes
Definition
Alterations in the point where arteries and veins cross, which can affect
blood circulation.


Implications
Changes may indicate potential health issues or adaptations within the
vascular system requiring medical attention.


Monitoring
Regular assessment is essential to identify significant alterations and
ensure proper treatment.
A/V crossings.

                 • arterioles and veins share a
                   common sheath within the
                   retinal tissue at crossing sites.
                 • The vein may be elevated or
                   depressed/compressed by the
                   arteriole and, in more severe
                   cases, may undergo an abrupt
                   right-angle change in course
                   just as it reaches the arteriole.
Elevated BP
• A moderate acute rise in blood pressure results in constriction of the
  arterioles.
• A severe acute rise in blood pressure (usually diastolic pressure
  greater than 120 mm Hg and systolic pressure greater than 200 mm Hg)
  causes fibrinoid necrosis of the vessel wall,
• Resulting in exudates, cotton-wool spots, flame-shaped hemorrhages,
  and even subretinal fluid.
• In the most severe form of hypertensive retinopathy, malignant
  hypertension (Fig 9-8), the optic disc swelling that occurs resembles
  the swelling seen in papilledema, and exudates can assume a stellate
  configuration in the outer plexiform layer of Henle referred to as a
  macular star.
                   Hypertensive retinopathy
                           Arteriolar constriction




         Focal                  Generalized          Arteriolosclerosis (A-V changes)
                         Extravascular signs




Flame-shaped retinal         Cotton-wool spots and               Disc oedema
haemorrhages                 macular star
   Ocular associations of hypertension




      Retinal vein occlusion          Retinal artery macroaneurysm




Anterior ischaemic optic neuropathy     Ocular motor nerve palsies
Grading of hypertensive retinopathy
                                   • grade 0: no changes
                                   • grade 1: barely detectable
                                     arterial narrowing
• Modified Scheie Classification   • grade 2: obvious arterial
  of Hypertensive Retinopathy:       narrowing with focal
                                     irregularities
                                   • grade 3: grade 2 plus retinal
                                     hemorrhages and/or exudates
                                   • grade 4: grade 3 plus disc
                                     swelling
Management of hypertension
• adequate control of the blood pressure to preserve the integrity of
  the cerebral, cardiac, and renal circulations
• the blood pressure should be lowered in a controlled fashion
  because a sudden drop in tissue perfusion could result in optic
  nerve infarction and permanent loss of vision
• In chronic hypertension control, avoid giving the antihypertensive
  medication at night before sleep.
Pregnancy
                                       • There is an increased incidence
                                         of central serous
                                         chorioretinopathy and uveal
                                         effusions in pregnant versus
• Several physiologic changes            nonpregnant women. Pregnancy-
  occur that are not considered          induced hypertension can cause
  pathologic. These include              visual disturbances such as
  lowering of the intraocular            scotoma, diplopia, and dimness
  pressure, decrease in corneal          of vision. Visual changes may be
  sensitivity, and transient loss of     a sign of impending seizure in a
  accommodation.                         preeclamptic patient. Retinal
                                         vascular changes can occur in
                                         toxemia, including focal and
                                         generalized arteriolar narrowing
Thyroid Disease
Thyroid exophthalmos
• Thyroid eye disease (TED),       • clinical feature of thyroid eye
  previously Graves disease, is      disease is
  an example of an important       • retraction of the upper and
  autoimmune disease                 lower eyelid, with upper-eyelid
  associated with ocular             lag on downgaze.
  manifestations. The
  pathophysiology of TED is an     • Thyroid eye disease is also the
  autoantibody-mediated              most common cause of
  enlargement of the extraocular     unilateral or bilateral
  muscles, orbital fat, and          protrusion of the globes, or
  lacrimal gland.                    exophthalmos,
COMPLICATIONS
 • Thyroid eye disease may cause other serious complications requiring an
   ophthalmologist’s care.
 • Diplopia due to extraocular muscle involvement is common and may
   require strabismus surgery.
 • Compression of the optic nerve within the orbit can cause loss of vision,
   necessitating surgery to decompress the orbit or irradiation to reduce the
   inflammatory swelling of the muscles.
Sickle Cell Anemia
- More common to cause ocular complications with sickle
hemoglobin C (SC) and sickle cell thalassemia (S Thal) disease
than patients with sickle cell (SS) disease.
- Intravascular sickling, hemolysis, hemostasis, >>>>thrombosis
>>>>>arteriolar occlusion followed by capillary nonperfusion.
- This is followed by neovascularization & retinal detachment
                                 Proliferative retinopathy




‘Sea-fan’ neovascularization      Fibrovascular proliferation   Fibrovascular proliferation
                                                                and bleeding
                               Non-proliferative retinopathy




  Salmon patches (equatorial         Black sunbursts ( RPE              Retinal holes
  haemorrhages)                      hyperplasia )
Inflammatory and Autoimmune Conditions
• Sarcoidosis:
 Ocular manifestations are characterized histologically by the
presence of focal noncaseating granulomas with hilar
lymphadenopathy (80% of patients).
 Ocular involvement from sarcoidosis may be asymptomatic, and
patients suspected of sarcoidosis should have a complete
ophthalmic evaluation.
 Sarcoidosis may cause anterior or posterior uveitis,with retinal
involvement.
neurosarcoidosis include optic neuropathy, oculomotor
abnormalities (including sixth nerve palsy), and, rarely, chiasmal
and retrochiasmal visual field loss.
Inflammatory and Autoimmune Conditions
• Other autoimmune or rheumatologic conditions, such (SLE),
  rheumatoid arthritis, granulomatosis with polyangiitis and
  microscopic polyangiitis, may cause various ocular
  manifestations such as sclerokeratitis, uveitis, optic neuropathy,
  and retinal vasculitis.
• About 10% of all JIA patients have iritis, but the inflammation is
  more common with the pauciarticular form of the disease (20%–
  30% of patients) and much less common in the polyarticular form.
  Patients who have JIA, especially the pauciarticular form,
Dry Eye Syndrome
• Dry eye may be seen in sarcoidosis because of lacrimal gland
  infiltration, but it also occurs in a variety of rheumatologic
  conditions, referred to as keratoconjunctivitis sicca. The most
  common causes are Sjögren syndrome, SLE, and rheumatoid
  arthritis.
• Patients with advanced rheumatoid arthritis occasionally develop
  severe drying of eyes and have a greater risk of corneal melting
  and possible perforation. In addition, they have a greater risk of
  corneal infection.
Malignancy
• The eye may be affected secondarily by cancer or by the various forms
  of cancer therapy.
• Ocular and orbital metastases are found in up to 5% of cancer patients.
• Systemic lymphoma affects the eye in about 3% of patients.
• large cell lymphoma can “masquerade” in the elderly patient as a
  chronic, often steroid-dependent or resistant uveitis or, more
  specifically, vitritis.
• In children, leukemic infiltration of ocular tissues can occur. Leukemia
  patients, develop intraretinal, preretinal, or subconjunctival
  hemorrhages as a result of thrombocytopenia or anemia.
Malignancy
• Cancer may have remote effects on the eye including autonomic
  dysfunction of the pupils as well as a rare but devastating
  paraneoplastic retinal degeneration, cancer-associated
  retinopathy and melanoma-associated retinopathy).
• Radiation:
- of tumors near the eye may lead to the development of cataract.
-delayed retinal vasculopathy.
-optic neuropathy,
• chemotherapeutic agents. Superficial keratitis, optic neuropathy,
  retinal artery occlusion, dryness and corneal decompensation.
AIDS
• The less common complications include herpes zoster (shingles),
  herpes simplex keratitis, conjunctival microangiopathy,
  toxoplasmic uveitis and retinitis, and visual field defects or
  oculomotor dysfunction resulting from central nervous system
  involvement.
• The most common HIV-related eye problems are HIV retinopathy,
  optic neuropathy, cataracts, dry eyes, infectious retinitis, and
  uveitis.
• Both intravenous ganciclovir and foscarnet are effective
  treatments, but they have significant systemic toxicity including
  bone marrow suppression with the former and renal insufficiency
  with the latter.
Ocular
manifestations
Ocular Syphilis

• Intraocular inflammation due to syphilis can be cured. Delay in
  diagnosis of syphilitic chorioretinitis can lead to permanent visual
  loss that can be avoided with early treatment.
• Systemic penicillin is curative. Patients with ocular disease should
  receive the neurosyphilis intravenous regimen of penicillin dosing
  even if the cerebrospinal fluid is normal.
Signs of ocular syphilis
• Acute bilateral interstitial keratitis with keratouveitis occurs in
  patients with congenital syphilis between the ages of 5 and 25
  years.
• Acute unilateral interstitial keratitis with keratouveitis occurs in
  acquired disease.
• Ocular involvement in secondary syphilis may present with iritis,
  retinitis, choroiditis, or papillitis.
• Diffuse neuroretinitis with papillitis and periarterial sheathing may
  also occur in neuro syphilis.
Other systemic infections
• The typical Candida lesion is a
  fluffy, white-yellow, superficial
  retinal infiltrate that may lead
  to the rapid development of
  overlying vitreous haze and
  eventual vitritis.
• systemic therapy with
  amphotericin B; intravitreal
  amphotericin or voriconazole
  may also be necessary.
Ocular Herpes Zoster
• Herpes zoster ophthalmicus (Fig     • Other ocular complications of
  9-14), from varicella zoster          herpes zoster include anterior
  involving the ophthalmic division     uveitis.
  of the fifth cranial nerve, may     • The combination of anterior
  result in ocular manifestations,      uveitis and keratitis, especially
  especially when vesicles appear       with loss of normal corneal
  on the tip of the nose from           sensation.
  extension along the Naso ciliary
  branch (Corneal infiltration with   • Rare ocular complications of
  the virus may lead corneal ulcer.     herpes zoster include diplopia
                                        secondary to oculomotor nerve
                                        involvement, optic neuritis,
