SOURCE: Semester 8\Opthalmo\Theoritical\PPT\L37) Red Eye.pdf

CHAPTER 4

The Red Eye
 OBJECTIVES

 As a primary care provider, you should be able to determine whether a
 patient with a red eye requires the prompt attention of an ophthalmologist or
 whether you can appropriately evaluate and treat the condition. To achieve
 this objective, you should learn to

         obtain an accurate ocular history and perform an examination
         differentiate between acute and chronic conditions
         recognize the signs of a red eye that indicate a vision-threatening
         condition
         describe the treatment for those cases you can manage and recognize
         the more serious problems that should be referred
         describe the serious complications of prolonged use of topical
         anesthetic and corticosteroid drops


Relevance
    primary care provider frequently encounters patients who complain of a red
A   eye. The condition causing the red eye is often a simple disorder, such as a
subconjunctival hemorrhage or an infectious conjunctivitis. These conditions
either resolve spontaneously or can be treated easily by the primary care
provider. Occasionally, the condition causing a red eye is a more serious
disorder, such as intraocular inflammation, corneal inflammation, or acute
glaucoma. A patient with one of these vision-threatening conditions requires the
urgent attention of an ophthalmologist, whose specialized skills, knowledge, and
examining instruments are needed in order to make correct therapeutic decisions.
Basic Information
Red eye refers to hyperemia, or injection of the superficially visible vessels, of
the conjunctiva, episclera, or sclera. Hyperemia can be caused by disorders of
these outer structures or of the cornea, iris, ciliary body, and ocular adnexa. An
accurate history followed by exam will aid in narrowing the differential
diagnosis and instituting appropriate management.


History

When a patient presents with a red eye, taking a thorough history is essential.
Occasionally a red eye may indicate systemic disease; therefore, a complete
medical history and review of systems is required.
   Additional questions to ask include

       Was the onset sudden or progressive?
       What is the timeline of symptoms; hours, days, or intermittent?
       Any family members with a red eye recently (ie, exposure to people with
       the same symptoms)?
       Is the patient using any over-the-counter or prescription eye
       medications?
       Is there a history of trauma or out-of-the-ordinary activity recently?
       Has the patient had recent eye surgery? (If so, immediately refer the
       patient to the surgeon who performed the procedure.)
       Does the patient wear contact lenses? If so, does the patient sleep in the
       contacts; when were the contacts last changed, and has anything recently
       changed regarding care of the lens?
       Has the patient had a recent cold or upper respiratory tract infection?
       Has the vision decreased?
       Is there pain? If so, can the patient describe the pain?
       Is there discharge from the involved eye(s)?
       Is the eye itching?
       Is there light sensitivity?
       Do the symptoms change with environment?
How to Examine

Nine diagnostic steps are used to evaluate a patient with a red eye:

   1.   Determine whether the visual acuity is normal or decreased, using a
        Snellen chart (see Chapter 1) or near card.
   2.   Decide by inspection what pattern of redness is present and whether it is
        due to subconjunctival hemorrhage, conjunctival hyperemia, ciliary
        flush, or a combination of these.
   3.   Detect the presence of conjunctival discharge and categorize it as to
        amount—profuse or scant—and character—purulent (Fig 4-1),
        mucopurulent, or serous.
   4.   Detect opacities of the cornea, including large keratic precipitates
        (inflammatory deposits on the corneal endothelium, Fig 4-2); corneal
        edema (Fig 4-3); corneal leukoma (a white opacity caused by scar tissue
        or corneal infiltrate, Fig 4-4); and irregular corneal reflection (Fig 4-5).
        Examination is done using a penlight, transilluminator, or slit lamp.
   5.   Search for disruption of the corneal epithelium by staining the cornea
        with fluorescein (see Chapter 1).
   6.   Estimate the depth of the anterior chamber as normal or shallow (see
        Chapter 1); detect any layered blood or pus, which would indicate either
        hyphema or hypopyon, respectively. (Compare Fig 4-6, a corneal ulcer
        with hypopyon, with hyphema, Fig 5-3.)
   7.   Detect irregularity of the pupils and determine whether 1 pupil is larger
        than the other. Observe the reactivity of the pupils to light to determine
        whether one pupil is more sluggish than the other or is nonreactive (see
        Chapters 1 and 7).
   8.   If elevated intraocular pressure (IOP) is suspected, as in angle-closure
        glaucoma, and reliable tonometry is available, then measurement of IOP
        can help confirm the diagnosis. (Tonometry is omitted when there is an
        obvious external infection.)
   9.   Detect the presence of proptosis (Fig 4-7), eyelid malfunction, or any
        limitations of eye movement.
FIGURE 4-1 Purulent conjunctivitis. With the lower eyelid everted, a creamy-white exudate is visible,
highlighted by the conjunctival hyperemia.
FIGURE 4-2 Large keratic precipitates. Multiple gray-white opacities on the back surface of the cornea
are seen against the background of the red reflex. These precipitates can result from chronic iridocyclitis.
FIGURE 4-3 Corneal edema. In this fiery red eye, the normally sharp corneal reflex is replaced by a
diffuse, hazy appearance. Iris details are not as clear as in a healthy eye.
FIGURE 4-4 Corneal leukoma. This dense, white corneal scar represents fibrosis secondary to a
previous corneal insult, most frequently trauma or infection. Outside the scar, the cornea is clear. If the
scar encroaches on the visual axis, acuity may be impaired.
FIGURE 4-5 Irregular corneal reflection. This localized irregularity of the normally sharp corneal light
reflection indicates local disruption of the corneal epithelium.
FIGURE 4-6 Corneal ulcer with hypopyon. This inflamed eye shows a white corneal opacity associated
with an irregular corneal reflex. In addition, a prominent layering of purulent material appears in the
inferior aspect of the anterior chamber, a hypopyon.
 FIGURE 4-7 Chronic proptosis. The right eye of this patient is proptotic, or anteriorly displaced. Marked
 edema (chemosis) with hyperemia of the conjunctiva is also evident, with tissue prolapse over the lower
 eyelid margin. The patient has an orbital tumor.



Disorders Associated With a Red Eye
Classification of a red eye depends primarily on whether the condition is acute
or chronic. Acute is defined by symptoms starting within days, and chronic is
defined by symptoms being present for longer than a week.


The Acute, Painful Red Eye

Symptoms that have begun within days should be assessed primarily for the
presence of pain. The painful, red eye is an urgent situation and should be
discussed with an ophthalmologist. Arriving to a diagnosis with an acute, painful
red eye will rely on the provider assessing each of the anatomic structures of the
eye to determine the etiology, starting with the cornea and progressing to the
sclera, anterior chamber, and posterior segment.

Corneal disorders

Disruption of the corneal epithelium results in significant pain for the patient.
This disruption can occur due to trauma, causing a corneal abrasion or foreign
body injury, or due to bacterial or viral infections.
    A patient with an abrasion or foreign body will usually give a history of
trauma causing the pain. An infectious keratitis will usually occur in a cornea
that has been compromised through contact lens use or a previous ocular
disorder.
    A red eye associated with soft contact lenses can be due to poor fit or
inadequate lens hygiene. Symptoms can range from mild conjunctival or
superficial corneal irritation to a more serious, vision-threatening infection of the
cornea. Referral to an ophthalmologist is advised to interpret the subtle slit-lamp
findings.
    Loss of the integrity of the corneal epithelium accompanied with infection or
inflammation can result in an ulcer with associated hyperemia. Often the
normally clear cornea appears hazy or white in the area of the ulcer. Mucus
secretions in the eye (called mattering) and pain are common as well as
photophobia.
    Herpes simplex keratitis is an infection of the cornea caused by the herpes
simplex virus (Fig 4-8). This form of keratitis is common, potentially serious,
and can lead to corneal ulceration or scarring. Characteristic dendrites can often
be seen in the corneal epithelium.




 FIGURE 4-8 Herpes simplex keratitis. In the center of the cornea is an irregular, dendritic (branchlike)
 lesion of the corneal epithelium.


Scleral inflammations

The sclera is the “white of the eye” and can become inflamed with or without
associated autoimmune disease (eg, rheumatoid arthritis, granulomatosis with
polyangiitis). Scleritis is an inflammation (localized or diffuse) of the sclera (Fig
4-9) that is uncommon, often protracted, and usually accompanied by pain,
which may be severe. A violaceous hue of sclera may indicate serious systemic
disease such as a collagen vascular disorder.
 FIGURE 4-9 Scleritis. This localized, raised hyperemic lesion is characteristic of scleritis, which is
 associated with collagen vascular disorders and rheumatoid diseases. In contrast, episcleritis appears flat,
 involves more superficial tissue, and is usually not associated with serious systemic disease.

    Episcleritis is an inflammation (often sectoral) of the episclera, the vascular
layer between the conjunctiva and the sclera. The condition is uncommon and
has the following features: no discharge, not vision threatening, and often tender
over the inflamed area. If recurrent, it may be associated with an underlying
systemic inflammatory disease.

Anterior chamber disorders

The acute, painful red eye associated with anterior chamber disorders can be
categorized into acute glaucoma or acute inflammation. Acute angle-closure
glaucoma is an uncommon form of glaucoma due to sudden and complete
occlusion of the anterior chamber angle by iris tissue (Fig 4-10). The condition is
serious. The more common chronic open-angle glaucoma causes no redness of
the eye. (See Chapter 3 for a discussion of glaucoma.)
 FIGURE 4-10 Acute angle-closure glaucoma. The irregular corneal reflection and hazy cornea suggest
 edema. The pupil is mid-dilated; the iris appears to be displaced anteriorly, with shallowing of the
 anterior chamber. These findings plus elevated intraocular pressure are diagnostic of acute angle-closure
 glaucoma.

    Iritis (more strictly iridocyclitis) is an inflammation of the iris alone or of
the iris and ciliary body, often manifested by ciliary flush (Fig 4-11). This is a
serious condition that requires attention.
 FIGURE 4-11 Ciliary flush. Dilated deep conjunctival and episcleral vessels adjacent and
 circumferential to the corneal limbus cast a violet hue characteristic of ciliary flush and best seen in
 natural light.



Acute, Nonpainful Red Eye

The nonpainful red eye that develops within days should not be associated with
any inflammation of the globe. The condition should be limited to the
conjunctiva and is nonurgent. Exceptions to this are patients who cannot “feel”
their eye, as in patients with a fifth cranial nerve palsy. Patients who have poor
corneal sensitivity and a red eye should be referred urgently to an
ophthalmologist.

Subconjunctival hemorrhage

A subconjunctival hemorrhage is an accumulation of blood in the potential
space between the conjunctiva and the sclera (see Fig 5-9). Although this
condition may look alarming, it is rarely vision threatening unless associated
with significant ocular trauma. The patient may note some ocular irritation but
should not complain of significant pain. Vision should be unaffected.

Conjunctivitis

Conjunctivitis is hyperemia of the conjunctival blood vessels (Fig 4-12). Causes
fall into several categories, including bacterial, viral, or allergic; exposure to
chemical irritants (including eyedrops); or mechanical irritation (eg, eyelashes or
foreign bodies). Conjunctivitis is common and often not serious.




 FIGURE 4-12 Conjunctivitis. The hyperemia seen here is produced by a diffuse dilation of the
 conjunctival blood vessels. The dilation tends to be less intense in the perilimbal region, in contrast to the
 perilimbal dilation of deeper vessels characteristic of ciliary flush.

   History should guide the provider to the correct diagnosis. A history of a cold
or contact with others who have similar symptoms suggests a viral
conjunctivitis; in addition, the eyelids will often be stuck together in the
morning. Itching is strongly suggestive of an allergic reaction to topical remedies
or environmental exposure. Bacterial conjunctivitis is relatively uncommon;
however, a chronic unilateral conjunctivitis should be evaluated for chlamydia
while hyperpurulent conjunctivitis suggests gonorrhea and is an urgent
condition.


Chronic, Irritated Red Eye

The chronic red eye is, in general, a nonurgent condition. Patients can be
categorized into whether they experience ocular irritation or not. Ocular irritation
associated with a red eye can be due to any process that disrupts a smooth tear
film across the surface of the cornea. A systematic approach should closely
examine the ocular surface to determine the etiology of the irritation. The
surface of the conjunctiva should be examined for any source of the irritation
including foreign bodies. The function of the meibomian glands should be
assessed to determine if an adequate lipid layer is being produced for the tear
film. The surface of the cornea should be examined for evidence of keratopathy
using fluorescein. (See Video 1-10.)

Keratoconjunctivitis sicca

Keratoconjunctivitis sicca, commonly called dry eye, is a disorder resulting
from tear deficiency or dysfunction. It causes pain, blurred vision, light
sensitivity (photophobia), and ocular redness.

Pterygium

Pterygium is an abnormal growth consisting of a triangular fold of tissue that
advances progressively over the cornea, usually from the nasal side (Fig 4-13). It
is usually not serious. Localized conjunctival inflammation may be associated
with pterygium. It is associated with ultraviolet exposure and occurs more
frequently in tropical climates. Surgical excision is indicated if the pterygium
starts to encroach on the visual axis.
FIGURE 4-13 Pterygium. This wedge-shaped growth of vascularized conjunctiva extends onto the
cornea. The initial sign of pterygium may be a localized chronic conjunctivitis.



Chronic Red Eye Without Irritation

The red eye that has no associated irritation is usually due to a congestive
process that has resulted in decreased flow of blood in the veins that drain the
orbit. Orbital processes that cause a red eye are discussed below.


Adnexal Disease

Adnexal disease affects the eyelids, lacrimal apparatus, and orbit. Eyelid
inflammations include stye (hordeolum) and blepharitis. A red eye can also
occur secondary to eyelid lesions (such as basal cell carcinoma, squamous cell
carcinoma, or molluscum contagiosum). In general, eyelid inflammations and
lesions can be referred to the ophthalmologist nonurgently.
    Abnormal eyelid function, as seen in Bell palsy and thyroid eye disease,
cause ocular exposure and corneal breakdown and may present with a red eye.
Lagophthalmos, or poor eyelid closure, is also commonly seen in comatose
patients. It can result in exposure keratitis, corneal ulceration, and blindness. An
eyelid that turns in toward the eye with the lashes contacting the globe surface
(entropion) can result in pain, photophobia, tearing, and redness of the eye. A red
eye secondary to an eyelid malposition should be discussed with the
ophthalmologist urgently.
    Lacrimal diseases that can cause a red eye include dacryocystitis (Fig 4-14)
and canaliculitis. Orbital inflammations, such as thyroid eye disease, and
vascular lesions in the orbit may cause a red eye as well. Any lacrimal or orbital
disease that causes a red eye should be urgently referred to the ophthalmologist.




 FIGURE 4-14 Dacryocystitis. This obvious, raised erythematous mass represents an acute inflammation
 of the lacrimal sac, usually secondary to a nasolacrimal duct obstruction. A purulent discharge may be
 extruded from the eyelid puncta by massage over the lacrimal sac.



Further Interpretation of the Findings
As noted earlier, several signs and symptoms of a red eye warrant immediate
attention. The presence of 1 or more of these findings should alert the provider
that the patient has a disorder requiring an ophthalmologist’s attention. Tables 4-
1 and 4-2 summarize significant symptoms and signs in the differential diagnosis
of a red eye.

Table 4-1




Table 4-2




Symptoms of a Red Eye

In the symptoms of a red eye that follow, a red symbol            by the heading
indicates a danger signal.

  Blurred vision

Blurred vision often indicates serious ocular disease (see “Reduced Visual
Acuity” in the following section, “Signs of a Red Eye”). Blurred vision that
improves with blinking suggests a discharge or mucus on the ocular surface.

  Severe pain

Pain may indicate keratitis, ulcer, iridocyclitis, scleritis, or acute glaucoma.
Patients with conjunctivitis may complain of a scratchiness or mild irritation but
not of severe pain.

  Photophobia

Photophobia is an abnormal sensitivity to light that accompanies iridocyclitis,
either alone or secondary to corneal inflammation. Patients with conjunctivitis
have normal light sensitivity.

  Colored halos

Rainbow-like fringes or colored halos seen around a point of light are usually a
symptom of corneal edema, often resulting from an abrupt rise in IOP.
Therefore, colored halos are a danger signal suggesting acute glaucoma as the
cause of a red eye.

Exudation

Exudation, also called mattering, is a typical result of conjunctival or eyelid
inflammation and does not occur in iridocyclitis or glaucoma. Patients will often
complain that their eyelids are “stuck together” on awakening from sleep.
Corneal ulcer is a serious condition that may or may not be accompanied by
exudate.

Itching

Although it is a nonspecific symptom, itching usually indicates an allergic
conjunctivitis.


Signs of a Red Eye

In the signs of a red eye that follow, a red symbol   indicates a danger signal.
  Reduced visual acuity

Reduced visual acuity suggests a serious ocular disease, such as an inflamed or
infected cornea, iridocyclitis, or glaucoma. It never occurs in simple
conjunctivitis unless there is associated corneal involvement.

  Ciliary flush

Ciliary flush (see Fig 4-11) is an injection of the deep conjunctival and episcleral
vessels surrounding the cornea. Seen most easily in daylight, ciliary flush
appears as a faint violaceous ring in which individual vessels are indiscernible to
the unaided eye. Ciliary flush is a danger sign often seen in eyes with corneal
inflammation, iridocyclitis, or acute glaucoma. Usually, ciliary flush is not
present in conjunctivitis.

  Conjunctival hyperemia

Conjunctival hyperemia (see Fig 4-12) is an engorgement of the larger and more
superficial bulbar conjunctival vessels. A nonspecific sign, it may be seen in
almost any of the conditions causing a red eye.

  Corneal opacification

In a patient with a red eye, corneal opacities always denote disease. These
opacities may be detected by direct illumination with a penlight, or they may be
seen with a direct ophthalmoscope (with a plus lens in the viewing aperture)
outlined against the red fundus reflex. Several types of corneal opacities may
occur:

        Keratic precipitates, or cellular deposits on the corneal endothelium,
        usually too small to be visible but occasionally forming large clumps;
        these precipitates can result from iritis or from chronic iridocyclitis (see
        Fig 4-2).
        A diffuse haze obscuring the pupil and iris markings, characteristic of
        corneal edema (see Fig 4-3) and frequently seen in acute glaucoma.
        Localized opacities due to keratitis or ulcer (see Fig 4-6).

  Corneal epithelial disruption
Disruption of the corneal epithelium occurs in corneal inflammations and
trauma. It can be detected in 2 ways:

   1.   Position yourself so that you can observe the reflection from the cornea
        of a single light source (eg, window, penlight) as the patient moves the
        eye into various positions. Epithelial disruptions cause distortion and
        irregularity of the reflection (see Fig 4-5).
   2.   Apply fluorescein to the eye. Diseased epithelium or areas denuded of
        epithelium will stain a bright green. (See Figs 1-14 and 1-15, Video 1-10,
        and accompanying text in Chapter 1 for the technique of fluorescein
        staining.)

  Pupillary abnormalities

The pupil in an eye with iridocyclitis typically is somewhat smaller than that of
the other eye, due to reflex spasm of the iris sphincter muscle. The pupil is also
distorted occasionally by posterior synechiae, which are inflammatory adhesions
between the lens and the iris. In acute glaucoma, the pupil is usually fixed, mid-
dilated (5–6 mm), and slightly irregular. Conjunctivitis does not affect the pupil.

  Shallow anterior chamber depth

In a red eye, a shallow anterior chamber should always suggest the possibility of
acute angle-closure glaucoma (see Fig 4-10). Anterior chamber depth can be
estimated through side illumination with a penlight. If possible, compare the
anterior chamber depth of the red eye with that of the other, unaffected eye. (See
Chapter 1 for details on estimating the depth of the anterior chamber.)

  Elevated intraocular pressure

IOP is unaffected by common causes of red eye other than iridocyclitis (IOP
often low) and glaucoma (IOP often elevated). IOP should be measured when
angle-closure glaucoma is suspected. (See Chapter 1 for details on the use of
tonometry to measure IOP; also see Video 1-8.)

  Proptosis

Proptosis is a forward displacement of the globe. Sudden proptosis suggests
serious orbital or cavernous sinus disease; in children, orbital infection or tumor
should be suspected. The most common cause of chronic proptosis is thyroid
disease; however, orbital mass lesions also result in proptosis. These lesions
should be ruled out early in the diagnosis (see Fig 4-7). Proptosis may be
accompanied by conjunctival hyperemia or limitation of eye movement. Small
amounts of proptosis are detected most easily by tilting the chin up and looking
from the chin over the maxilla at the relative corneal position.

Discharge

The type of discharge may be an important clue to the cause of a patient’s
conjunctivitis. Purulent (creamy-white, see Fig 4-1) or mucopurulent (yellowish)
exudate suggests a bacterial cause. Serous (watery, clear, or yellow-tinged)
discharge suggests a viral cause. Scant, white, stringy discharge sometimes
occurs in allergic conjunctivitis and in keratoconjunctivitis sicca, a condition
commonly known as dry eye.

Preauricular lymph-node enlargement

Enlargement of the lymph node just in front of the auricle is a frequent sign of
viral conjunctivitis. Usually, such enlargement does not occur in acute bacterial
conjunctivitis. Preauricular node enlargement can be a prominent feature of
some unusual varieties of chronic granulomatous conjunctivitis, known
collectively as Parinaud oculoglandular syndrome. Cat-scratch fever can present
with these findings.


Associated Systemic Problems

The primary care provider should be aware that systemic conditions may include
ocular involvement. (See Chapter 9 for additional details.)

Upper respiratory tract infection and fever

Infection of the upper respiratory tract accompanied by fever may be associated
with conjunctivitis, particularly when these symptoms are due to adenovirus type
3 or type 7 (both of which cause pharyngoconjunctival fever). Allergic
conjunctivitis may be associated with the seasonal rhinitis of hay fever.
Erythema multiforme

Erythema multiforme is an acute, immune-mediated condition characterized by
the appearance of distinctive target-like lesions on the skin. These lesions are
often accompanied by erosions or bullae involving the oral, genital, and/or
ocular mucosae. Erythema multiforme can result in severe conjunctivitis,
irreversible conjunctival scarring, and blindness. Stevens-Johnson syndrome and
toxic epidermal necrolysis are severe mucocutaneous reactions, triggered by
medications or infections, characterized by extensive necrosis and detachment of
the epidermis. Ocular involvement may include severe conjunctivitis with a
purulent discharge. Corneal ulceration is frequent, and anterior uveitis or
panophthalmitis may occur. Pain and photophobia are common presenting
symptoms. Scarring with the development of synechiae between the eyelids and
conjunctiva (symblepharon) may be late sequelae. These conditions should be
attended to by an ophthalmologist.


Laboratory Diagnosis

In practice, most mild cases of conjunctivitis are managed without laboratory
assistance. This approach represents a compromise with ideal management, but
it is justified by the economic waste of obtaining routine smears and cultures in
such a common and benign disease. Most clinicians, after making a presumptive
clinical diagnosis of bacterial conjunctivitis, proceed directly to broad-spectrum
topical ophthalmic antibiotic treatment. Cases of presumed bacterial
conjunctivitis that do not improve after 2 days of antibiotic treatment should be
referred to an ophthalmologist for confirmation of the diagnosis and appropriate
laboratory studies. In addition, in cases of hyperpurulent conjunctivitis, when
copious purulent discharge is produced, conjunctival cultures, and
ophthalmologic consultation are indicated due to a possible gonococcal cause.
Gonococcal hyperpurulent conjunctivitis is a serious, potentially blinding
disease.
     In doubtful cases, smears of exudate or conjunctival scrapings can confirm
clinical impressions regarding the type of conjunctivitis. Typical findings include
polymorphonuclear cells and bacteria in bacterial conjunctivitis, lymphocytes in
viral conjunctivitis, and eosinophils in allergic conjunctivitis. Cultures for
bacteria and determinations of antibiotic sensitivity are useful in cases resistant
to therapy.
Management or Referral
The following conditions either require no treatment or may be appropriately
treated by a primary care provider. Patients with chronic, unilateral blepharitis
should be referred to an ophthalmologist to rule out a malignant process such as
sebaceous cell carcinoma or squamous cell carcinoma.
    Cases requiring prolonged treatment or those in which the expected response
to treatment does not occur promptly should also be referred to an
ophthalmologist. (See Table 4-3 for a summary of instructions for patients to
follow.)

Table 4-3




Blepharitis

Response to the treatment of blepharitis, or inflammation of the eyelid, is often
frustratingly slow, and relapses are common. The inflammation of the eyelid can
primarily be in the anterior aspect of the eyelid, as in staphylococcal blepharitis,
or the posterior aspect of the eyelid, as in blepharitis secondary to acne rosacea.
Treatment should address the following considerations.

Eyelid hygiene

Warm compresses (tap water on clean washcloth) can be applied for 3–5
minutes, each morning and before bedtime. If eyelids are oily, follow with eyelid
scrubs using dilute baby shampoo (2 drops of shampoo in 2 oz of water).

Staphylococcal infection

Staphylococcal infection (Fig 4-15) may be present. If so, it should be treated
with application of appropriate antibiotic ointment (bacitracin or erythromycin)
to the eyelid margin at night for 1 week.




 FIGURE 4-15 Staphylococcal blepharitis. Chronic staphylococcal eyelid infection produces inflamed,
 swollen eyelids that may ulcerate. The oily discharge binds the lashes and sometimes condenses to form a
 collarette around a lash.


Associated acne rosacea/meibomian gland dysfunction

These symptoms should be treated with doxycycline 100 mg twice a day and
tapered to once a day for 2 months or longer. Artificial tears may be applied 4–8
times a day as needed for symptoms of dryness.

Scalp seborrhea

Treatment with antidandruff shampoos can improve symptoms of seborrheic
blepharitis (Fig 4-16).
 FIGURE 4-16 Seborrheic blepharitis. The dry, flaky lashes and red eyelid margins seen here are
 characteristic of seborrheic blepharitis.


Contact dermatitis

Contact dermatitis (Fig 4-17) can masquerade as blepharitis. A careful history of
the eyelid redness associated with application of medication helps make the
diagnosis. For example, the glaucoma medication brimonidine can produce a red
eye with erythematous, swollen eyelids that have a dry “leathery” texture. Any
ocular medication or cosmetics can be associated with similar clinical findings.
Discontinuing the offending product should result in improvement in symptoms
within 48 hours, but healing may take up to 2 weeks.
 FIGURE 4-17 Contact dermatitis. Allergic contact dermatitis shown here is secondary to topical
 ophthalmic medication.



Stye and Chalazion

A stye, or hordeolum, is an acute, usually sterile, inflammation of the glands or
hair follicles in the eyelid. Hordeola can be categorized as external or internal,
according to where the inflammation is located in the eyelid (Figs 4-18, 4-19). A
chalazion is a chronic inflammation of a meibomian gland in the eyelid that may
develop spontaneously or may follow a hordeolum (Fig 4-20). A persistent or
recurring eyelid mass should undergo biopsy because it may be a rare sebaceous
gland carcinoma, squamous cell carcinoma, or basal cell carcinoma of the eyelid
rather than a benign chalazion.
FIGURE 4-18 External hordeolum. This large, acute swelling, which is red and painful, involves the hair
follicles or associated glands of Zeis or Moll and points toward the skin.
FIGURE 4-19 Internal hordeolum. An acute infection of a meibomian gland produces a swelling
directed internally toward the conjunctiva. This figure demonstrates a discrete, circumscribed area of
inflammation highlighted by a hyperemic conjunctiva.
FIGURE 4-20 Chalazion. This large, nontender eyelid mass is a chronic granulomatous inflammation of
a meibomian gland.
   The mainstays of treatment are the following:

        Apply warm compresses to the eyelid 4 times a day for 3–5 minutes.
        Massage the eyelid and lash line to encourage the glands to open up and
        drain.
        Apply topical ocular antibiotic ointment to the lash line and over the area
        if there is tenderness and infection is suspected. Rarely, oral antibiotics
        may be indicated if there is a secondary bacterial infection.
        Refer the patient for incision and curettage of the lesion if there is no
        resolution in 3–4 weeks.


Subconjunctival Hemorrhage

In the absence of blunt trauma, hemorrhage into the subconjunctival space, the
potential space between the conjunctiva and the sclera, requires no treatment
and, unless recurrent, no evaluation (see Fig 5-9). Causes include a sudden
increase in ocular venous pressure, such as occurs with coughing, sneezing,
vomiting, or vigorous rubbing of the eye. Many subconjunctival hemorrhages
occur during sleep. Some patients may note mild tenderness with the onset of the
hemorrhage, but this resolves in 1 or 2 days. If recurrent, an underlying bleeding
disorder should be considered. Blood pressure should be measured, as marked
elevation can result in subconjunctival hemorrhage.


Conjunctivitis

There is no specific medicinal treatment for viral conjunctivitis, although
patients should be instructed in proper precautions to prevent contagion. Here
are some treatments often recommended:

        Apply cool compresses periodically throughout the day.
        Use artificial tears if irritation occurs.
        Apply antibiotic eyedrops (eg, trimethoprim/sulfacetamide or
        fluoroquinolones) 4–6 times a day if bacterial infection is suspected.
        Minimize spread to other family members and co-workers (eg, washing
        hands after touching eye secretions, no sharing of towels).

   Corticosteroids have limited use in treatment of infectious conjunctivitis.
Eyedrops containing a combination of antibiotics and corticosteroids should be
used only under the close observation of an ophthalmologist.


Therapeutic Warnings

Because of possible serious health risks, caution is required in the use of the
following therapeutic agents.

Topical anesthetics

Topical anesthetics should never be prescribed for prolonged analgesia in ocular
inflammations and injuries for 3 reasons:
        Topical anesthetics inhibit growth and healing of the corneal epithelium.
        Although rare, severe allergic reactions may result from instillation of
        topical anesthetics.
        Corneal anesthesia eliminates the protective blink reflex, exposing the
        cornea to dehydration, injury, and infection.

Topical corticosteroids

Topical corticosteroids have 3 potentially serious ocular side effects:

        Both herpes simplex keratitis (see Fig 4-8) and fungal keratitis are
        markedly potentiated by corticosteroids. Corticosteroids may mask
        symptoms of inflammation, making the patient “feel” better, while the
        cornea may be melting away or even perforating.
        Prolonged use of corticosteroids, locally or systemically, often leads to
        cataract formation.
        Local application of corticosteroids for 2–6 weeks may cause an
        elevation of IOP in approximately one-third of the population. The
        pressure rise may be severe in a small percentage of cases. Optic nerve
        damage and permanent loss of vision can occur. The combination of a
        corticosteroid and an antibiotic carries the same risk. Topical
        corticosteroids alone or in combination with antibiotics should not be
        administered to the eye by a primary care provider. They can be very
        helpful when used under the close supervision of an ophthalmologist.


         POINTS TO REMEMBER

          If visual acuity is acutely and significantly reduced, a diagnosis of
          conjunctivitis is extremely unlikely.
          Fluorescein should always be instilled in a red eye to test for
          integrity of the corneal epithelium.
          A pupillary inequality or irregularity in a patient with red eye(s) is a
          danger signal for serious ocular disease.
          If the patient wears soft contact lenses, referral to an ophthalmologist
          is advised because differentiation between mild and severe
